WILLIAM BLAKE
(1757-1827)
Blake's father was a London haberdasher. His only formal education
was in art: at the age often he entered a drawing school and later studied for
a time at the school of the Royal Academy of Arts. At the age of fourteen he
was apprenticed to a well-known engraver, James Basire, from whom he
learned the technique of illuminated printing - a technique he further
developed and used in his major works to emphasize the mythical quality of
his writing. His earliest poems are contained in Poetical Sketches published in
1783. In 1789 he engraved and published his Songs oflnnocence^ in which he
first showed the mystical cast of his mind. In 1790 he engraved his prose
work, The Ma/mage of Heaven and Hell. His other major work, the Songs of
Experience (1794) is in contrast with the Songs oflnnocence. The brightness of
the earlier work gives place to a sense of gloom and mystery, and the power
of evil. At the time of his death Blake was litde known as an artist and almost
entirely unknown as a poet. Blake's poems express ideas and feelings which
are the result of an intense probing into the source of his own being and
character. He uses symbols, startling forms and methods. Apart from his
lyrics he wrote a number of prophetic books which are concerned which the
spiritual and political history of man. His poems are vividly illuminating,
and his symbols provide an expression of wisdom and spiritual health.
From Songs oflnnocence
Introduction
Piping down the valleys wild,
Piping songs of pleasant glee,
On a cloud I saw a child,
And he laughing said to me:
Tipe a song about a Lamb!'
So I piped with merry cheer.
'Piper, pipe that song again.'
So I piped: he wept to hear.
AN ANTHOLOGY OF ENGLISH POETRY 163
WILLIAM BLAKE
TDrop thy pipe, thy happy pipe;
Sing thy songs of happy cheer!'
So I sung the same again,
While he wept with joy to hear.
Tiper, sit thee down and write
In a book, that all may read.'
So he vanished from my sight;
And I plucked a hollow reed,
And I made a rural pen,
And I stained the water clear,
And I wrote my happy songs
Every child may joy to hear.
The Lamb
Little lamb, who made thee*
Does thou know who made thee,
Gave thee lift, and bid thee feed
By the stream and o'er the mead;
Gave thee clothing of delight,
Softest clothing, woolly, bright;
Gave thee such a tender voice,
Making all the vales rejoice?
Litde lamb, who made thee?
Does thou know who made thee?
Litde lamb, I'll tell thee;
Litde lamb, Til tell thee:
He is called by thy name,
For He calls Himself a Lamb.
He is meek, and He is mild,
He became a little child.
I a child, and thou a lamb,
We are called by His name.
Litde lamb, God bless thee!
Litde lamb, God bless thee!
(1789)
164
117891
DR. KOD6 KR1SZTINA
WILLIAM BLAKE
The Divine Image
To Mercy, Pity, Peace, and Love
All pray in their distress;
And to these virtues of delight
Return their thankfulness.
For Mercy, Pity, Peace, and Love
Is God our Father dear,
And Mercy, Pity, Peace, and Love
Is man, His child and care.
For Mercy has a human heart,
Pity, a human face,
And Love, the human form divine,
And Peace, the human dress.
Then every man, of every dime,
That prays in his distress,
Prays to the human form divine,
Love, Mercy, Pity, Peace.
And all must love the human form,
In heathen, Turk, or Jew;
Where Mercy, Love, and Pity dwell
There God is dwelling too.
(1789)
Chimney Sweeper
When my mother died I was very young,
And my father sold me while yet my tongue
Could scarcely cry' Sveep! Veep! "weep! "weep!'
So your chimneys I sweep, and in soot I sleep.
There's little Tom Dacre, who cried when his head,
That curl'd like a lamb's back, was shav'd: so I said
flush, Tom! never mind it, for when your head's bare
You know that the soot cannot spoil your white hair.'
AN ANTHOLOGY OF ENGLISH POETRY 165
WILLIAM BLAKE
And so he was quiet, and that very night,
As Tom was a-sleeping, he had such a sight! -
That thousands of sweepers, Dick, Joe, Ned, and Jack,
Were all of them locked up in coffins of black.
And by came an Angel who had a bright key,
And he open'd the coffins & set them all free;
Then down a green plain leaping, laughing, they run
And wash in a river, and shine in the Sun.
Then naked & white, all their bags left behind,
They rise upon clouds, and sport in the wind;
And the Angel told Tom, if he'd be a good boy,
He'd have God for his father, & never want joy.
And so Tom awoke; and we rose in the dark,
And got with our bags & our brushes to work.
Tho' the morning was cold, Tom was happy & warm;
So if all do their duty, they need not fear harm.
(1789)
Holy Thursday
T/was on a Holy Thursday, their innocent faces clean,
The children walking two and two, in red and blue and green,
Grey-headed beadles walked before, with wands as white as snow,
Till into the high dome of Paul's they like Thames' waters flow.
O what a multitude they seem'd, these flowers of London town!
Seated in companies mey sit with radiance all their own.
The hum of multitudes was there, but multitudes of lambs,
Thousands of little boys and girls raising their innocent hands.
Now like a mighty wind they raise to Heaven the voice of song,
Or like harmonious thunderings the seats of Heaven among.
Beneath them sit the aged men, wise guardians of the poor;
Then cherish pity, lest you drive an angel from your door.
(1789)
166 DR. KOD6 KRISZTTNA
WILLIAM BLAKE
From Songs of Experience
Introduction
Hear the voice of the Bard,
Who present, past, and future, sees;
Whose ears have heard
The Holy Word
That walked among the ancient trees;
Calling the lapsed soul,
And weeping in the evening dew;
That might control
The starry pole,
And fallen, fallen light renew!
'O Earth, O Earth, return!
Arise from out the dewy grass!
Night is worn,
And the morn
Rises from the slumbrous mass.
Turn away no more;
Why wilt thou turn away!
The starry floor,
The watery shore,
Is given thee till the break of day.'
(1794)
The Sick Rose
O rose, thou art sick!
The invisible worm,
That flies in the night,
In the howling storm,
Has found out thy bed
Of crimson joy,
And his dark secret love
Does thy life destroy.
(17941
AN ANTHOLOGY OF ENGLISH POETRY 167
WILLIAM BLAKE
The Tyger
Tyger, tyger, burning bright
In the forests of the night,
What immortal hand or eye
Could frame thy fearful symmetry?
In what distant deeps or skies
Burnt the fire of thine eyes ?
On what wings dare he aspire?
What the hand dare seize the fibre?
And what shoulder and what art
Could twist the sinews of thy heart?
And, when thy heart began to beat,
What dread hand? and what dread feet?
What the hammer? what the chain?
In what furnace was thy brain?
What the anvil? what dread grasp
Dare its deadly terrors clasp?
When the stars threw down their spears,
And watered heaven with their tears,
Did he smile his work to see?
Did he who made the Lamb make thee?
Tiger, tiger, burning bright
In the forests of the night,
What immortal hand or eye
Dare frame thy fearful symmetry?
(1794)
168 DR. KOD6 KRISZTTNA
WILLIAM BLAKE
The Human Abstract'
Pity would be no more
If we did not make somebody Poor;
And Mercy no more could be
If all were as happy as we.
And mutual fear brings peace,
Till the selfish loves increase:
Then Cruelty knits a snare,
And spreads his baits with care.
He sits down with holy fears,
And waters the ground with tears;
Then Humility takes its root
Underneath his foot.
Soon spreads the dismal shade
Of Mystery over his head;
And the Catterpillar and Fly
Feed on the Mystery.
And it bears the fruit of Deceit,
Ruddy and sweet to eat;
And the Raven his nest has made
In its thickest shade.
The Gods of the earth and sea
Sought thro* Nature to find this Tree;
But their search was all in vain:
There grows one in the Human Brain.
(1794)
45 The matched contrary to The Divine Image in Songs ofInnocence. The virtues of the earlier poem,
"Mercy, Pity, Peace, and Love," are now represented as possible marks for exploitation, cruelty,
conflict, and hypocritical humility.
AN ANTHOLOGY OF ENGLISH POETRY 169
WILLIAM BLAKE
Chimney Sweeper
A little black thing among the snow,
Crying! Veep! weep!' in notes of woe!
TVhere are thy father and mother? Say!' -
They are both gone up to the church to pray.
'Because I was happy upon the heath,
And smiled among the winter's snow,
They clothed me in the clothes of death,
And taught me to sing the notes of woe.
'And because I am happy and dance and sing,
They think they have done me no injury,
And are gone to praise God and His priest and king,
Who made up a heaven of our misery.'
117941
Holy Thursday
Is this a holy thing to see
In a rich and fruitful land, -
Babes reduced to misery,
Fed with cold and usurous hand?
Is that trembling cry a song?
Can it be a song of joy?
And so many children poor?
It is a land of poverty!
And their sun does never shine,
And their fields are bleak and bare,
And their ways are filled with thorns,
It is eternal winter there.
For where'er the sun does shine,
And where'er the rain does fall,
Babe can never hunger there,
Nor poverty the mind appal.
(1794)
170 DR. KOD6 KR1SZTINA
WILLIAM BLAKE
The Marriage of Heaven and Hell
A Song of Liberty
1. The Eternal Female groan'd! it was heard over all the Earth:
2. Albion's coast is sick, silent; the American meadows faint!
3. Shadows of Prophecy shiver along by the lakes and the rivers and
mutter across the ocean: France, rend down thy dungeon;
4. Golden Spain, burst the barriers of old Rome;
5. Cast thy keys, O Rome, into the deep down falling, even to
eternity down falling
6. And weep!
7. In her trembling hands she took the new born terror howling;
8. On those infinite mountains of light, now barr'd out by the
atlantic sea, the new born fire stood before the starry king!
9. FlagM with grey brow'd snows and thunderous visages the jealous
wings wav"d over the deep.
10. The speary hand burned aloft, unbuckled was the shield, forth
went the hand of jealousy among the flaming hair, and hurl'd the
new born wonder thro' the starry night.
11. The fire, the fire, is falling!
12. Look up! look up! O citizen of London, enlarge thy countenance:
O Jew, leave counting gold! return to thy oil and wine. O African!
black African! (go, winged thought widen his forehead.)
13. The fiery limbs, the flaming hair, shot like the sinking sun into the
western sea.
14. Wak'd from his eternal sleep, the hoary element roaring fled away:
15. Down rush'd, beating his wings in vain, the jealous king; his grey
brow'd councellors, thunderous warriors, curl'd veterans, among
helms, and shields, and chariots horses, elephants: banners,
castles, slings and rocks,
16. Falling rushing, mining! buried in the ruins, on Urthona's dens;
17. All night beneath the rains, then, their sullen flames faded, emerge
round the gloomy King.
18. With thunder and fire: leading his starry hosts thro' the waste
wilderness, he promulgates his ten commands, glancing his beamy
eyelids over the deep in dark dismay,
AN ANTHOLOGY OF ENGLISH POETRY 171
WILLIAM BLAKE
19. Where the son of fire in his eastern cloud, while the morning
plumes her golden breast.
20. Spurning the clouds written with curses, stamps the stony law to
dust, loosing the eternal horses from the dens of night, crying:
Empire is no more! and now the lion & wolf shall cease.
Chorus.
Let the Priests of the Raven of dawn, no longer in deadly black, with
hoarse note curse the sons of joy. Nor his accepted brethren, whom,
tyrant, he calls free: lay the bound or build the roof. Nor pale religious
letchery call that virginity, that wishes but acts not!
For every thing that lives is Holy.
(1792-93)
172 DR. KOD6 KRISZITNA
WILLIAM WORDSWORTH
(1770-1850)
Wordsworth was born in Cockermouth in West Cumberland. His
mother died when he was only eight years old, and his relatives sent him to
a school at Hawkshead near Esthwaite Lake, in the heart of the region that
he and Coleridge were to transform into one of the poetic centres of
England. He attended St. John's College, Cambridge and acquired his
degree in 1791. In 1790 he went on a walking tour in France, the Alps,
and Italy. He returned to France late in 1791, and spent a year there. The
revolutionary movement was then at its height and this exercised a strong
influence on his mind. But due to a lack of funds and the outbreak of war
between England and France he was forced to return to England. In 1795
Wordsworth made the acquaintance of Samuel Taylor Coleridge, which
meant the beginning of a dose and enduring friendship. The result of the
joint efforts of the two poets was a small volume of poetry published
anonymously in 1798 entitled Lyrical Ballads. This volume clearly
announces a new literary departure. In 1799 Wordsworth, with his sister
Dorothy, settled at Grasmere where he spent the remainder of his life. In
1813 an appointment as Stamp Distributor (revenue collector) for
Westmorland was evidence of his recognition as a national poet. He was
also awarded honorary degrees, and in 1843, was appointed Poet
Laureate. He died in 1850 at the age of eighty. Wordsworth was very
much a man of his time. As a "worshipper of nature" he had a sentimental
interest in his characteristic subject - matter. Due to Wordsworth's
conservative outiook, beside the rustic scenery in his poetry, his obvious
intention was to instruct and draw a moral lesson.
Lines Composed a Few Miles Above Tintern Abbey,
on Revisiting the Banks of the Wye during a Tow, July 13,1798
Five years have past; five summers, with the lengtli
Of five long winters! and again I hear
These waters, rolling from their mountain-springs
With a soft inland murmur. Once again
Do I behold these steep and lofty cliffs,
That on a wild secluded scene impress
AN ANTHOLOGY OF ENGLISH POETRY 173
WILLIAM WORDSWORTH
Thoughts of more deep seclusion; and connect
The landscape with the quiet of the sky.
The day is come when I again repose
Here, under this dark sycamore, and view
These plots of cottage ground, these orchard tufts,
Which at this season, with their unripe fruits,
Are clad in one green hue, and lose themselves
<Mid groves and copses. Once again I see
These hedgerows, hardly hedgerows, little lines
Of sportive wood run wild; these pastoral farms,
Green to the very door; and wreaths of smoke
Sent up, in silence, from among the trees!
With some uncertain notice, as might seem
Of vagrant dwellers in the houseless woods,
Or of some Hermit's cave, where by his fire
The Hermit sits alone.
These beauteous forms,
Through a long absence, have not been to me
As is a landscape to a blind man's eye;
But oft, in lonely rooms, and
 cmid the din
Of towns and cities, I have owed to them,
In hours of weariness, sensations sweet,
Felt in the blood, and felt along the heart;
And passing even into my purer mind,
With tranquil restoration: -feelings too
Of unremembered pleasure; such, perhaps,
As have no slight or trivial influence
On that best portion of a good man's life,
His little, nameless, unremembered, acts
Of kindness and of love. Nor less, I trust,
To them I may have owed another gift,
Of aspect more sublime; that blessed mood,
In which the burthen of the mystery,
In which the heavy and the weary weight
Of all this unintelligible world,
Is lightened: - that serene and blessed mood,
174 DR. KOD6 KRISZTTNA
WILLIAM WORDSWORTH
In which the affections gently lead us on -
Until, the breath of this corporeal frame
And even the motion of our human blood
Almost suspended, we are laid asleep
In body, and become a living soul;
While with an eye made quiet by the power
Of harmony, and the deep power of joy,
We see into the life of things.
If this
Be but a vain belief, yet, oh! how oft -
In darkness and amid the many shapes
Of joyless daylight; when the fretful stir
Unprofitable, and the fever of the world,
Have hung upon the beatings of my heart -
How oft, in spirit, have I turned to thee,
0 sylvan Wye! thou wanderer through the woods,
How often has my spirit turned to thee!
And now, with gleams of half-extinguished thought,
With many recognitions dim and faint,
And somewhat of a sad perplexity,
The picture of the mind revives again:
While here I stand, not only with the sense
Of present pleasure, but with pleasing thoughts
That in this moment there is life and food
For future years. And so I dare to hope,
Though changed, no doubt, from what I was when first
1 came among these hills; when like a roe
I bounded o'er the mountains, by the sides
Of the deep rivers, and the lonely streams,
Wherever nature led - more like a man
Flying from something that he dreads than one
Who sought the thing he loved. For nature then
(The coarser pleasures of my boyish days,
And their glad animal movements all gone by)
To me was all in all. -1 cannot paint
What then I was. The sounding cataract
AN ANTHOLOGY OF ENGLISH POETRY 175
WILLIAM WORDSWORTH
Haunted me like a passion; the tall rock,
The mountain, and the deep and gloomy wood,
Their colours and their forms, were then to me
An appetite; a feeling and a love,
That had no need of a remoter charm,
By thought supplied, nor any interest
Unborrowed from the eye. - That time is past,
And all its aching joys are now no more,
And all its dizzy raptures. Not for this
Faint I, nor mourn nor murmur; other gifts
Have followed; for such loss, I would believe,
Abundant recompense. For I have learned
To look on nature, not as in the hour
Of thoughtless youth; but hearing oftentimes
The still, sad music of humanity,
Nor harsh nor grating, though of ample power
To chasten and subdue. And I have felt
A presence that disturbs me with the joy
Of elevated thoughts; a sense sublime
Of something far more deeply interfused,
Whose dwelling is the light of setting suns,
And the round ocean and the living air,
And the blue sky, and in the mind of man:
A motion and a spirit, that impels
All thinking things, all objects of all thought,
And rolls through all things. Therefore am I still
A lover of the meadows and the woods,
And mountains; and of all that we behold
From this green earth; of all the mighty world
Of eye, and ear -both what they half create,
And what perceive; well pleased to recognise
In nature and the language of the sense
The anchor of my purest thoughts, the nurse,
The guide, the guardian of my heart, and soul
Of all my moral being.
Nor perchance,
If I were not thus taught, should I the more
176 DR. KOD6 KRISZTTNA
WILLIAM WORDSWORTH
Suffer my genial spirits to decay:
For thou art with me here upon the banks
Of this fair river; thou my dearest Friend,
My dear, dear Friend; and in thy voice I catch
The language of my former heart, and read
My former pleasures in the shooting lights
Of thy wild eyes. Oh! yet a little while
May I behold in thee what I was once,
My dear, dear Sister! and this prayer I make,
Knowing that Nature never did betray
The heart that loved her; 'tis her privilege,
Through all the years of this our life, to lead
From joy to joy: for she can so inform
The mind that is within us, so impress
With quietness and beauty, and so feed
With lofty thoughts, that neither evil tongues,
Rash judgments, nor the sneers of selfish men,
Nor greetings where no kindness is, nor all
The dreary intercourse of daily life,
Shall e'er prevail against us, or disturb
Our cheerful faith, that all which we behold
Is full of blessings. Therefore let the moon
Shine on thee in thy solitary walk;
And let the misty mountain winds be free
To blow against thee; and, in after years,
When these wild ecstasies shall be matured
Into a sober pleasure; when thy mind
Shall be a mansion for all lovely forms,
Thy memory be as a dwelling place
For all sweet sounds and harmonies; oh! then,
If solitude, or fear, or pain, or grief,
Should be thy portion, with what healing thoughts
Of tender joy wilt thou remember me,
And these my exhortations! Nor, perchance -
If I should be where I no more can hear
Thy voice, nor catch from thy wild eyes these gleams
Of past existence - wilt thou then forget
That on the banks of this delightful stream
AN ANTHOLOGY OF ENGLISH POETRY 177
WILLIAM WORDSWORTH
We stood together; and that I, so long
A worshipper of Nature, hither came
Unwearied in that service; rather say
With warmer love -oh! with far deeper zeal
Of holier love. Nor wilt rhou then forget,
That after many wanderings, many years
Of absence, these steep woods and lofty diffi,
And this green pastoral landscape, were to me
More dear, both for themselves and for thy sake!
11798! 11798)
We are Seven
A simple Child,
That lightly draws its breath,
And feels its life in every limb,
What should it know of death!
I met a little cottage Girl:
She was eight years old, she said;
Her hair was thick with many a curl
That clustered round her head.
She had a rustic, woodland air,
And she was wildly clad:
Her eyes were fair, and very fair;
- Her beauty made me glad.
"Sisters and brothers, little Maid,
How many may you be?"
"How many? Seven in all," she said
And wondering looked at me.
"And where are they? I pray you tell."
She answered, "Seven are we;
And two of us at Conway dwell,
And two are gone to sea.
178 DR. KOD6 KRISZTINA
WILLIAM WORDSWORTH
"Two of us in the church-yard lie,
My sister and my brother;
And, in the church-yard cottage, I
Dwell near them with my mother."
"You say that two at Conway dwell,
And two are gone to sea,
Yet ye are seven! -1 pray you tell,
Sweet Maid, how this may be."
Then did the little Maid reply,
"Seven boys and girls are we;
Two of us in the church-yard lie,
Beneath the church-yard tree."
"You run about, my little Maid,
Your limbs they are alive;
If two are in the church-yard laid,
Then ye are only five."
"Their graves are green, they may be seen,"
The little Maid replied,
"Twelve steps or more from my mother's door,
And they are side by side.
"My stockings there I often knit,
My kerchief there I hem;
And there upon the ground I sit,
And sing a song to them.
"And often after sunset, Sir,
When it is light and fair,
I take my little porringer,
And eat my supper there.
"The first that died was sister Jane;
In bed she moaning lay,
Till God released her of her pain;
And then she went away.
AN ANTHOLOGY OF ENGLISH POETRY 179
WILLIAM WORDSWORTH
"So in die church-yard she was laid;
And, when the grass was dry,
Together round her grave we played,
My brother John and I.
"And when the ground was white with snow,
And I could run and slide,
My brother John was forced to go,
And he lies by her side.M
"How many are you, then," said I,
"If they two are in heaven?"
Quick was the little Maid's reply,
"O Master! we are seven."
"But they are dead; those two are dead!
Their spirits are in heaven!"
Twa s throwing words away; for still
The little Maid would have her will,
And said, "Nay, we are seven!"
117981 (18001
From Sonnets
September 3,1802
Earth has not anything to show more fair:
Dull would he be of soul who could pass by
A sight so touching in its majesty:
This City now doth like a garment wear
The beauty of the morning: silent, bare,
Ships, towers, domes, theatres, and temples lie
Open unto the fields, and to the sky,
All bright and glittering in the smokeless air.
Never did sun more beautifully steep
In his first splendour valley, rock, or hill;
180 DR. KOD6 KRISZTINA
WILLIAM WORDSWORTH
Ne'er saw I, never felt, a calm so deep!
The river glideth at his own sweet will:
Dear God! the very houses seem asleep;
And all that mighty heart is lying still!
(1802) (1807)
It is a Beautious Evening
It is a beauteous evening, calm and free,
The holy time is quiet as a Nun
Breathless with adoration; the broad sun
Is sinking down in its tranquillity;
The gentleness of heaven broods o'er the Sea:
Listen! the migjity Being is awake,
And doth with his eternal motion make
A sound like thunder—everlastingly.
Dear Child! dear Girl! that walkest with me here,
If thou appear untouched by solemn thought,
Thy nature is not therefore less divine:
Thou liest in Abraham's bosom all the year;
And worship'st at the Temple's inner shrine,
God being with thee when we know it not.
(1802) (1807)
London, 1802
Milton! thou should'st be living at this hour:
England hath need of thee: she is a fen
Of stagnant waters: altar, sword, and pen,
Fireside, the heroic wealth of hall and bower,
Have forfeited their ancient English dower
Of inward happiness. We are selfish men;
Oh! raise us up, return to us again;
And give us manners, virtue, freedom, power.
Thy soul was like a Star, and dwelt apart:
Thou hadst a voice whose sound was like the sea:
AN ANTHOLOGY OF ENGLISH POETRY 181
WILLIAM WORDSWORTH
Pure as the naked heavens, majestic, free,
So didst thou travel on life's common way,
In cheerful godliness; and yet thy heart
The lowliest duties on herself did lay,
(1802) (1807)
The World is Too Much With Us
The world is too much with us; late and soon,
Getting and spending, we lay waste our powers:
Little we see in Nature that is ours;
We have given our hearts away, a sordid boon!
The Sea that bares her bosom to the moon;
The winds that will be howling at all hours,
And are up-gathered now like sleeping flowers;
For this, for everything, we are out of tune;
It moves us not. - Great God! Fd rather be
A Pagan suckled in a creed outworn;
So might I, standing on this pleasant lea,
Have glimpses that would make me less forlorn;
Have sight of Proteus rising from the sea;
Or hear old Triton blow his wreathed horn.
(1807}
I Wandered Lonely as a Cloud
I wandered lonely as a cloud
That floats on high o'er vales and hills,
When all at once I saw a crowd,
A host, of golden daffodils;
Beside the lake, beneath the trees,
Fluttering and dancing in the breeze.
Continuous as the stars that shine
And twinkle on the milky way,
They stretched in never-ending line
182 DR. KOD6 KRISZTTNA
WILLIAM WORDSWORTH
Along the margin of a bay:
Ten thousand saw I at a glance,
Tossing their heads in sprightly dance.
The waves beside them danced; but they
Out-did the sparkling waves in glee:
A poet could not but be gay,
In such a jocund company:
I gazed-and gazed-but little thought
What wealth the show to me had brought:
For oft, when on my couch I lie
In vacant or in pensive mood,
They flash upon that inward eye
Which is the bliss of solitude;
And then my heart with pleasure fills,
And dances with the daffodils.
(1804) (1807)
Ode
Intimations of Immortality from
Recollections of Early Childhood
There was a time when meadow, grove, and stream,
The earth, and every common sight,
To me did seem
Apparelled in celestial light,
The glory and the freshness of a dream.
It is not now as it hath been of yore; -
Turn wheresoe'er I may,
By night or day,
The things which I have seen I now can see no more.
AN ANTHOLOGY OF ENGLISH POETRY 183
WILLIAM WORDSWORTH
n
The Rainbow comes and goes,
And lovely is the Rose,
The Moon doth with delight
Look round her when the heavens are bare,
Waters on a starry night
Are beautiful and fair;
The sunshine is a glorious birth;
But yet I know, where'er I go,
That there hath past away a glory from the earth.
m
Now, while the birds thus sing a joyous song,
And while the young lambs bound
As to the tabor's sound,
To me alone there came a thought of grief:
A timely utterance gave that thought relief,
And I again am strong:
The cataracts blow their trumpets from the steep;
No more shall grief of mine the season wrong;
I hear the Echoes through the mountains throng,
The Winds come to me from the fields of sleep,
And all the earth is gay;
Land and sea
Give themselves up to jollity,
And with the heart of May
Doth every Beast keep holiday; -
Thou Child of Joy,
Shout round me, let me hear thy shouts, thou happy
Shepherd-boy!
IV
Ye blessed Creatures, I have heard the call
Ye to each other make; I see
The heavens laugh with you in your jubilee;
My heart is at your festival,
My head hath its coronal,
184 DR. KOD6 KRISZITNA
WILLIAM WORDSWORTH
The fulness of your bliss, I feel -1 feel it all.
Oh evil day! if I were sullen
While Earth herself is adorning,
This sweet May-morning,
And the Children are culling
On every side,
In a thousand valleys far and wide,
Fresh flowers; while the sun shines warm,
And the Babe leaps up on his Mother's arm: -
I hear, I hear, wim joy I hear!
- But there's a Tree, of many, one,
A single Field which I have looked upon,
Both of them speak of something that is gone:
The Pansy at my feet
Doth the same tale repeat:
Whither is fled the visionary gleam?
Where is it now, the glory and the dream?
Our birth is but a sleep and a forgetting:
The Soul that rises with us, our life's Star,
Hath had elsewhere its setting,
And cometh from afar:
Not in entire forgetfulness,
And not in utter nakedness,
But trailing clouds of glory do we come
From God, who is our home:
Heaven lies about us in our infancy!
Shades of the prison-house begin to close
Upon the growing Boy,
But He beholds the light, and whence it flows,
He sees it in his joy;
The Youth, who daily farther from the east
Must travel, still is Nature's Priest,
And by the vision splendid
Is on his way attended;
At length the Man perceives it die away,
And fade into the light of common day.
AN ANTHOLOGY OF ENGLISH POETRY 185
WILLIAM WORDSWORTH
VI
Earth fills her lap with pleasures of her own;
Yearnings she hath in her own natural kind,
And, even with something of a Mother's mind,
And no unworthy aim,
The homely Nurse doth all she can
To make her Foster-child, her Inmate Man,
Forget the glories he hath known,
And that imperial palace whence he came.
vn
Behold the Child among his new-born blisses,
A six years' Darling of a pigmy size!
See, where 'mid work of his own hand he lies,
Fretted by sallies of his mother's kisses,
With light upon him from his father's eyes!
See, at his feet, some little plan or chart,
Some fragment from his dream of human life,
Shaped by himself with newly-learned art;
A wedding or a festival,
A mourning or a funeral;
And this hath now his heart,
And unto this he frames his song:
Then will he fit his tongue
To dialogues of business, love, or strife;
But it will not be long
Ere this be thrown aside,
And with new joy and pride
The little Actor cons another part;
Filling from time to time his "humorous stage"
With all the Persons, down to palsied Age,
That Life brings with her in her equipage;
As if his whole vocation
Were endless imitation.
186 DR. KOD6 KRISZITNA
WILLIAM WORDSWORTH
vm
Thou, whose exterior semblance doth belie
Thy Soul's immensity;
Thou best Philosopher, who yet dost keep
Thy heritage, thou Eye among the blind,
That, deaf and silent, read'st the eternal deep,
Haunted for ever by the eternal mind, -
Mighty Prophet! Seer blest!
On whom those truths do rest,
Which we are toiling all our lives to find,
In darkness lost, the darkness of the grave;
Thou, over whom thy Immortality
Broods like the Day, a Master o'er a Slave,
A Presence which is not to be put by;
Thou little Child, yet glorious in the might
Of heaven-born freedom on thy being's height,
Why with such earnest pains dost thou provoke
The years to bring the inevitable yoke,
Thus blindly with thy blessedness at strife?
Full soon thy Soul shall have her earthly freight,
And custom lie upon thee with a weight
Heavy as frost, and deep almost as life!
IX
O joy! that in our embers
Is something that doth live,
That nature yet remembers
What was so fugitive!
The thought of our past years in me doth breed
Perpetual benediction: not indeed
For that which is most worthy to be blest -
Delight and liberty, the simple creed
Of Childhood, whether busy or at rest,
With new-fledged hope still fluttering in his breast: -
Not for these I raise
The song of thanks and praise;
But for those obstinate questionings
Of sense and outward things,
AN ANTHOLOGY OF ENGLISH POETRY 187
WILLIAM WORDSWORTH
s from us, vanishings;
Blank misgivings of a Creature
Moving about in worlds not realised,
High instincts before which our mortal Nature
Did tremble like a guilty Thing surprised:
But for those first affections,
Those shadowy recollections,
Which, be they what they may,
Are yet the fountain light of all our day,
Are yet a master light of all our seeing;
Uphold us, cherish, and have power to make
Our noisy years seem moments in the being
Of the eternal Silence: truths that wake,
To perish never;
Which neither listlessness, nor mad endeavour,
Nor Man nor Boy,
Nor all that is at enmity with joy,
Can utterly abolish or destroy!
Hence in a season of calm weather
Though inland far we be,
Our Souls have sight of that immortal sea
Which brought us hither,
Can in a moment travel thither,
And see the Children sport upon the shore,
And hear the mighty waters rolling evermore.
Then sing, ye Birds, sing, sing a joyous song!
And let the young Lambs bound
As to the tabor's sound!
We in thought will join your throng,
Ye that pipe and ye that play,
Ye that through your hearts to-day
Feel the gladness of the May!
What though the radiance which was once so bright
Be now for ever taken from my sight,
Though nothing can bring back the hour
Of splendour in the grass, of glory in the flower;
188 DR. KOD6 KRISZTINA
WILLIAM WORDSWORTH
We will grieve not, rather find
Strength in what remains behind;
In the primal sympathy
Which having been must ever be;
In the soothing thoughts that spring
Out of human suffering;
In the faith that looks through death,
In years that bring the philosophic mind.
XI
And O, ye Fountains, Meadows, Hills, and Groves,
Forebode not any severing of our loves!
Yet in my heart of hearts I feel your might;
I only have relinquished one delight
To live beneath your more habitual sway.
I love the Brooks which down their channels fret,
Even more than when I tripped lightly as they;
The innocent brightness of a new-born Day
Is lovely yet;
The Clouds that gather round the setting sun
Do take a sober colouring from an eye
That hath kept watch o'er man's mortality;
Another race hath been, and other palms are won.
Thanks to the human heart by which we live,
Thanks to its tenderness, its joys, and fears,
To me the meanest flower that blows can give
Thoughts that do often lie too deep for tears.
(1807)
AN ANTHOLOGY OF ENGLISH POETRY 189
WILLIAM WORDSWORTH
The Solitary Reaper
Behold her, single in the field,
Yon solitary Highland Lass!
Reaping and singing by herself;
Stop here, or gently pass!
Alone she cuts and binds the grain,
And sings a melancholy strain;
0 listen! for the Vale profound
Is overflowing with the sound.
No Nightingale did ever chaunt
More welcome notes to weary bands
Of travellers in some shady haunt,
Among Arabian sands:
A voice so thrilling ne'er was heard
In spring-time from the Cuckoo-bird,
Breaking the silence of the seas
Among the farthest Hebrides.
Will no one tell me what she sings? -
Perhaps the plaintive numbers flow
For old, unhappy, far-off things,
And battles long ago:
Or is it some more humble lay,
Familiar matter of to-day?
Some natural sorrow, loss, or pain,
That has been, and may be again?
Whatever the theme, the Maiden sang
As if her song could have no ending;
1 saw her singing at her work,
And o'er the sickle bending;—
I listened, motionless and still;
And, as I mounted up the hill
The music in my heart I bore,
Long after it was heard no more.
(1805) (1807)
190 DR. KOD6 KRISZITNA
SAMUEL TAYLOR COLERIDGE
(1772-18341
Coleridge was born in Ottary St. Mary, in rural Devonshire, as the son
of a vicar. After the death of his father he was sent to a school at Christ's
Hospital in London. He was a dreamy, enthusiastic, and extraordinarily
precocious schoolboy. He attended Jesus College in Cambridge, but
found little intellectual stimulation, and fell into idleness and debt He
enlisted in the Light Dragoons, but was discharged after a few months. He
was sent back to Cambridge, but he eventually left without taking a degree
in 1794. He made the acquaintance of Robert Southey, and the two
devoted themselves to Tantisocracy', a form of ideal democratic
community, which signified an equal rule by all, but the Pantisocracy
scheme collapsed. In 1795 Coleridge met Wordsworth and at once judged
him to be "the best poet of the age". After their joint publication of Lyrical
Ballads in 1798, Coleridge, Wordsworth and his sister, Dorothy, spent a
winter in Germany, where he attended the University of Gottingen and
began his lifelong study of Kant and the post-Kantian German
philosophers and critics that had a strong influence on him and helped to
explore and develop his individual manner of thinking about philosophy,
religion and aesthetics. By and by, Coleridge's life became ever more
unsettled, also due to the fact that he had formed a habit of taking opium
to ease the painful physical ailments from which he had suffered from an
early age. The remaining years of his life, which he spent with Dr. and
Mrs.Gillman, were quieter and happier than any he had known since the
turn of the century. He died in 1834, and was buried in Highgate Church.
Frost at Midnight
The Frost performs its secret ministry,
Unhelped by any wind. The owlet's cry
Came loud, -and hark, again! loud as before.
The inmates of my cottage, all at rest,
Have left me to that solitude, which suits
Abstruser musings: save that at my side
My cradled infant slumbers peacefully.
Tis calm indeed! so calm, that it disturbs
And vexes meditation with its strange
AN ANTHOLOGY OF ENGLISH POETRY 191
SAMUEL TAYLOR COLERIDGE
And extreme silentness. Sea, hill, and wood,
With all the numberless goings-on of life,
Inaudible as dreams! the thin blue flame
Lies on my low-burnt fire, and quivers not;
Only that film, which fluttered on the grate,
Still flutters there, the sole unquiet thing.
Methinks its motion in this hush of nature
Gives it dim sympathies with me who live,
Making it a companionable form,
Whose puny flaps and freaks the idling Spirit
By its own moods interprets, every where
Echo or mirror seeking of itself,
And makes a toy of Thought.
But O! how oft,
How oft, at school, with most believing mind,
Presageful, have I gazed upon the bars,
To watch that fluttering stranger! and as oft
With unclosed lids, already had I dreamt
Of my sweet birthplace, and the old church-tower,
Whose bells, the poor man's only music, rang
From morn to evening, all the hot Fair-day,
So sweetly, that they stirred and haunted me
With a wild pleasure, falling on mine ear
Most like articulate sounds of things to come!
So gazed I, till the soothing things, I dreamt,
Lulled me to sleep, and sleep prolonged my dreams!
And so I brooded all the following morn,
Awed by the stern preceptor's face, mine eye
Fixed with mock study on my swimming book:
Save if the door half opened, and I snatched
A hasty glance, and still my heart leaped up,
For still I hoped to see the stranger's face,
Townsman, or aunt, or sister more beloved,
My playmate when we both were clothed alike!
Dear Babe, that sleepest cradled by my side,
Whose gentle breathings, heard in this deep calm,
192 DR. KOD6 KRISZITNA
SAMUEL TAYLOR COLERIDGE
Fill up the interspersed vacancies
And momentary pauses of the thought!
My babe so beautiful! it thrills my heart
With tender gladness, thus to look at thee,
And think that thou shalt learn far other lore,
And in far other scenes! For I was reared
In the great city, pent mid cloisters dim,
And saw nought lovely but the sky and stars.
But thou, my babe! shalt wander like a breeze
By lakes and sandy shores, beneath the crags
Of ancient mountain, and beneath the clouds,
Which image in their bulk both lakes and shores
And mountain crags: so shalt thou see and hear
The lovely shapes and sounds intelligible
Of that eternal language, which thy God
Utters, who from eternity doth teach
Himself in all, and all things in himself.
Great universal Teacher! he shall mould
Thy spirit, and by giving make it ask.
Therefore all seasons shall be sweet to thee,
Whether the summer clothe the general earth
With greenness, or the redbreast sit and sing
Betwixt the tufts of snow on the bare branch
Of mossy apple-tree, while the nigh thatch
Smokes in the sun-thaw; whether the eave-drops fell
Heard only in the trances of the blast,
Or if the secret ministry of frost
Shall hang them up in silent icicles,
Quietly shining to the quiet Moon.
(1798)
Kubla Khan
Or, A Vision in a Dream. A Fragment
In the summer of the year 1797, the Author, then in ill health, had retired to
a lonely farm-house between Porlock and Linton, on the Exmoor confines
AN ANTHOLOGY OF ENGLISH POETRY 193
SAMUEL TAYLOR COLERIDGE
of Somerset and Devonshire. In consequence of a slight indisposition, an
anodyne had been prescribed, from the effects of which he fell asleep in his
chair at the moment that he was reading the following sentence, or words of
the same substance, in Purchas's Pilgrimage: "Here the Khan Kubla
commanded a palace to be built, and a stately garden thereunto. And thus
ten miles of fertile ground were inclosed with a wall." The Author continued
for about three hours in a profound sleep, at least of the external senses,
during which time he has the most vivid confidence, that he could not have
composed less than from two to three hundred lines; if that indeed can be
called composition in which all the images rose up before him as things,
with a parallel production of the correspondent expressions, without any
sensation or consciousness of effort. On awakening he appeared to himself to
have a distinct recollection of the whole, and taking his pen, ink, and paper,
instantly and eagerly wrote down the lines that are here preserved. At this
moment he was unfortunately called out by a person on business from
Porlock, and detained by him above an hour, and on his return to his room,
found, to his no small surprise and mortification, that though he still retained
some vague and dim recollection of the general purport of the vision, yet,
with the exception of some eight or ten scattered lines and images, all the rest
had passed away like the images on the surface of a stream into which a stone
has been cast, but, alas! Without the after restoration of the latter!
Then all the charm
Is broken - all that phantom-world so fair
Vanishes, and a thousand circlets spread,
And each mis-shape the other. Stay awile,
Poor youth! Who scarcely dar'st lift up thine eyes -
The stream will soon renew its smoothness, soon
The visions will return! And lo, he stays,
And soon the fragments dim of lovely forms
Come trembling back, unite, and now once more
The pool becomes a mirror.
[From Coleridge's The Picture; or Lover's Resolution, lines 91-100] 1816
In Xanadu did Kubla Khan
A stately pleasure-dome decree:
Where Alph, the sacred river, ran
Through caverns measureless to man
Down to a sunless sea.
194 DR. KOD6 KRISZITNA
SAMUEL TAYLOR COLERIDGE
So twice five miles of fertile ground
With walls and towers were girdled round:
And there were gardens bright with sinuous rills,
Where blossomed many an incense-bearing tree;
And here were forests ancient as the hills,
Enfolding sunny spots of greenery.
But oh! That deep romantic chasm which slanted
Down the green hill athwart a cedarn cover!
A savage place! As holy and enchanted
As e'er beneath a waning moon was haunted
By woman wailing for her demon-lover!
And from this chasm, with ceaseless turmoil seething,
As if this earth in fast thick pants were breathing,
A mighty fountain momently was forced:
Amid whose swift half-intermitted burst
Huge fragments vaulted like rebounding hail,
Or chaffy grain beneath the thresher's flail:
And
 cmid these dancing rocks at once and ever
It flung up momently the sacred river.
Five miles meandering with a mazy motion
Through wood and dale the sacred river ran,
Then reached the caverns measureless to man,
And sank in tumult to a lifeless ocean:
And 'mid this tumult Kubla heard from far
Ancestral voices prophesying war!
The shadow of the dome of pleasure
Floated midway on the waves;
Where was heard the mingled measure
From the fountain and the caves.
It was a miracle of rare device,
A sunny pleasure-dome with caves of ice!
A damsel with a dulcimer
In a vision once I saw:
It was an Abyssinian maid,
And on her dulcimer she played,
AN ANTHOLOGY OF ENGLISH POETRY 195
SAMUEL TAYLOR COLERIDGE
Singing of Mount Abora.
Could I revive within me
Her symphony and song,
To such a deep delight 'twould win me
That with music loud and long
I would build that dome in air,
That sunny dome! Those caves of ice!
And all who heard should see them there,
And all should cry, Beware! Beware!
His flashing eyes, his floating hair!
Weave a circle round him thrice,
And close your eyes with holy dread,
For he on honey-dew hath fed
And drunk the milk of Paradise.
(1797-98) (1816)
The Rime of the Ancient Mariner
IN SEVEN PARTS
Facile credo, plures esse Naturas invisibiles quam visibiles in rerum universitate.
Sed horum omnium familiam quis nobis enarrabit? et gradus et cognationes et
disciimina et singulorum munera? Quid agunt? quae loca habitant? Harum rerum
notitiam semper ambivit ingenium humanum, nunquam attigit. Juvat, interea, non
diffiteor, quandoque in animo, tanquam in tabula, majoris et melioris mundi
imaginem contemplari: ne mens assuefacta hodiernae vitae minutiis se contrahat
nimis, et tola subsidat in pusillas cogitationes. Sed veritati interea invigilandum est,
modusque servandus, ut certa ab incenis, diem a nocce, distinguamus. - T. Burner,
Archaeol. PhiL, p. 68 (slightly edited by Coleridge) *
46 I can easily believe, that there are more invisible than visible Beings in the universe. But who shall
describe for us their families? and their ranks and relationships and distinguishing features and
functions? What they do? where they live? The human mind has always circled around a
knowledge of these things, never attaining it. I do not doubt, however, that it is sometimes
beneficial to contemplate, in thought, as in a Picture, the image of a greater and better world; lest
the intellect, habituated to the trivia of daily life, may contract itself too much, and wholly sink into
trifles. But at the same time we must be vigilant for truth, and maintain proportion, that we may
distinguish certain from uncertain, day from night. - T. Burnet, Archaeol. Phil. p. 68 (1692)
196 DR. KOD6 KRISZITNA
SAMUEL TAYLOR COLERIDGE
ARGUMENT
How a Ship having passed the Line was driven by storms to the cold
Country towards the South Pole; and how from thence she made her
course to the tropical Latitude of the Great Pacific Ocean; and of the
strange things that befell; and in what manner the Ancyent M ar mere came
back to his own Country.
Parti
It is an ancient Mariner,
Andhestoppethoneofthree.
°By thy long beard and glittering eye,
Now wherefore stopp'st thou me!
The Bridegroom's doors are opened wide,
And I am next of kin;
The guests are met, the feast is set:
May^t hear the merry din.'
He holds him with his skinny hand,
There was a ship,' quoth he.
'Hold off! unhand me, grey-beard loon!'
Eftsoons his hand dropt he.
Th,w,Mi,g-a^,i He holds him with his glittering eyespellbound by the eye of m &" & J
.*, *L»#Le ».,, The Wedding-Guest stood still,
"tr"""**''" *"'
 An d
 listens like a three years' child:
The Mariner hath his will.
The Wedding-Guest sat on a stone:
He cannot choose but hear;
And thus spake on that ancient man,
The bright-eyed Mariner.
AN ANTHOLOGY OF ENGLISH POETRY 197
SAMUEL TAYLOR COLERIDGE
The ship was cheered, the harbour cleared,
Merrily did we drop
Below the kirk, below the hill,
Below the lighthouse top.
rfe Mariner tdk hw The Sun came up upon the left,
futtrfS* .goat O" 1
 °f the
 se a cam e ne !
wind •nifd,w,®i,,. And he shone bright, and on the right
«»*"-"*» " Went down into the sea.
Higher and higher every day,
Till over the mast at noon -
The Wedding-Guest here beat his breast,
For he heard the loud bassoon.
n, w«uim-G»,* The bride hath paced into the hall,
12S2SL. Red as a rose is she;
continmthhktttk. Nodding their heads before her goes
The merry minstrelsy.
The Wedding-Guest he beat his breast,
Yet he cannot choose but hear;
And thus spake on that ancient man,
The bright-eyed Mariner.
The ship driven by a 'And now the Storm-Blast came, and he
d h h
He struck with his overtaking wings,
And chased us south along.
With sloping masts and dipping prow,
As who pursued with yell and blow
Still treads the shadow of his foe,
And forward bends his head,
The ship drove fast, loud roared the blast,
The southward aye we fled.
198 DR. KOD6 KRISZTINA
SAMUEL TAYLOR COLERIDGE
And now there came both mist and snow,
And it grew wondrous cold:
And ice, mast-high, came floating by,
As green as emerald.
The land of ice, and tj
fearful sounds where*
living thing was to be
And through the drifts the snowy difts
Did send a dismal sheen:
Nor shapes of men nor beasts we ken -
The ice was all between.
The ice was here, the ice was there,
The ice was all around:
It cracked and growled, and roared and howled,
Like noises in a swound!
gre*t Se*-bird, At i e n oth did cross an Albatross,
! the Mlxdmss, „ *> , .
through the Thorough the fog it came;
was As if it had been a Christian soul,
received with great joy . .
and hospitality. We hailed it in God s name.
It ate the food it ne'er had eat,
And round and round it flew.
The ice did split with a thunder-fit;
The helmsman steered us through!
And a good south wind sprung up behind;
•men, ttndfoUweth the Th e AlbatTOSS di d follow,
hip as it returned fa^ every Jay^ for food Or play,
Came to the mariner's hollo!
AndhftheAlbatt
proveth a bird of good
northward through fog
and floating ice.
In mist or cloud, on mast or shroud,
It perched for vespers nine;
Whiles all the night, through fog-smoke white,
Glimmered the white Moon-shine.'
AN ANTHOLOGY OF ENGLISH POETRY 199
SAMUEL TAYLOR COLERIDGE
The ancient Mariner
inhospitably kiUeth the
pious bird of good omen.
'God save thee, ancient Mariner!
From the fiends, that plague thee thus! -
Why look'st thou so?3
 - With my cross-bow
I shot the Albatross.
Part 2
The Sun now rose upon the right:
Out of the sea came he,
Still hid in mist, and on the left
Went down into the sea.
And the good south wind still blew behind,
But no sweet bird did follow,
Nor any day for food or play
Came to the mariners' hollo!
against the ancient
Mariner, for kUUnt
And I had done a hellish thing,
And it would work 'em woe:
For all averred, I had killed the bird
That made the breeze to blow.
Ah wretch! said they, the bird to slay,
That made the breeze to blow!
But when the fog
cleared-off, they justify
the same, and thus
make themselves
accomplices in the
The fair breeze
continues; the ship
Ocean, and sails
northward, even till it
reaches the Line.
Nor dim nor red, like God's own head,
The glorious Sun uprist:
Then all averred, I had killed the bird
That brought the fog and mist.
Twas right, said they, such birds to slay,
That bring the fog and mist.
The fair breeze blew, the white foam flew,
The furrow followed free;
We were the first that ever burst
Into that silent sea.
200 DR. KOD6 KRISZTTNA
SAMUEL TAYLOR COLERIDGE
The ship hath been
suddenly becalmed.
Down dropt the breeze, the sails dropt down,
Twas sad as sad could be;
And we did speak only to break
The silence of the sea!
And the Albatross
begins to be avenged.
All in a hot and copper sky,
The bloody Sun, at noon,
Right up above the mast did stand,
No bigger than the Moon.
Day after day, day after day,
We stuck, nor breath nor motion;
As idle as a painted ship
Upon a painted ocean.
Water, water, every where,
And all the boards did shrink;
Water, water, every where,
Nor any drop to drink.
The very deep did rot: O Christ!
That ever this should be!
Yea, slimy things did crawl with legs
Upon the slimy sea.
About, about, in reel and rout
The death-fires danced at night;
The water, like a witch's oils,
Burnt green, and blue and white.
And some in dreams assured were
Of the Spirit that plagued us so;
Nine fathom deep he had followed us
From the land of mist and snow.
A Spirit had followed
them; one of the
invisible inhabitants c
thisplanet, neither
departed souk nor
angels; concerning
whom the learned
Jew, Josephas, and the Platonic Constantinopolitan, Michael Psetlus,
are very numerous, and there is no climate or element without one or,
AN ANTHOLOGY OF ENGLISH POETRY 201
SAMUEL TAYLOR COLERIDGE
whereof they bangthe
dead sea-bird round his
neck.
And every tongue, through utter drought,
Was withered at the root;
We could not speak, no more than if
We had been choked with soot.
Ah! well a-day! what evil looks
Had I from old and young!
Instead of the cross, the Albatross
About my neck was hung.
The ancient Mai
beholdabasigm
element afar off.
At its nearer iif>p:v,nh,
h stietaeth him to be a
ship; and at a dear
ransom hefreeth his
speech from the bonds of
(hint.
Part 3
There passed a weary time. Each throat
Was parched, and glazed each eye.
A weary time! a weary time!
How glazed each weary eye,
When looking westward, I beheld
A something in the sky.
At first it seemed a little speck,
And then it seemed a mist;
It moved and moved, and took at last
A certain shape, I wist
A speck, a mist, a shape, I wist!
And still it neared and neared:
As if it dodged a water-sprite,
It plunged and tacked and veered.
With throats unslaked, with black lips baked,
We could nor laugh nor wail;
Through utter drought all dumb we stood!
I bit my arm, I sucked the blood,
And cried, A sail! a sail!
202 DR. KOD6 KRISZTINA
SAMUEL TAYLOR COLERIDGE
With throats unslaked, with black lips baked,
Agape they heard me call:
A flash <fjoy; Gramercy! they for joy did grin,
And all at once their breath drew in,
As they were drinking all.
Andhorwrjbiiom. For See! see! (I cried) she tacks no more!
'ZllZHlLt Hither to work us weal;
wWwmi Without a breeze, without a ride,
She steadies with upright keel!
The western wave was all a-flame.
The day was well nigh done!
Almost upon the western wave
Rested the broad bright Sun;
When that strange shape drove suddenly
Betwixt us and the Sun.
it stmetb him but the And straight the Sun was flecked with bars,
sk^onofaship. (Heaven's Mother send us grace!)
As if through a dungeon-grate he peered
With broad and burning face.
Alas! (thought I, and my heart beat loud)
How fast she nears and nears!
Are those her sails that glance in the Sun,
nke: restless eossameres?
Are those her ribs through which the Sun
D l d
 P* ^ as through a grate*
teuton ship. And is that Woman all her crew?
Is that a Death! and are there two?
Is Death that woman's mate?
Like rani, like «tw? jj e r j ^ wer e rec ^ jjgj. {QQ]^ were free,
Her locks were yellow as gold:
Her skin was as white as leprosy,
The Night-mare Life-in-Death was she,
Who thicks man's blood with cold.
AN ANTHOLOGY OF ENGLISH POETRY 203
bars on the face of the
setting Sun.T
Spectre-Worn,
herDeath-mi
be
in and
te, and
aril the
SAMUEL TAYLOR COLERIDGE
Death and The naked hulk alongside came,
diceTjmthe skip's 'crew, And the twain were casting dice;
.ndsh, itheutte,) <The game is done! Fve won! Pve won!'
winnetb the ancient T . . .
ji«n«r. Quoth she, and whistles thrice.
No twilight within the The Sun's rim dips; the stars rush out:
""* *"*s
"" At one stride comes the dark;
With far-heard whisper, o'er the sea,
Off shot the spectre-bark.
Um ***** We listened and looked sideways up!
Fear at my heart, as at a cup,
My life-blood seemed to sip!
The stars were dim, and thick the night,
The steerman's face by his lamp gleamed white;
From the sails the dew did drip -
Till domb above the eastern bar
The horndd Moon, with one bright star
Within the nether tip.
One after another, One after one, by the star-dogged Moon,
Too quick for groan or sigh,
Each turned his face with a ghastly pang,
And cursed me with his eye.
His shipmates dnp Four times fifty living men,
(And I heard nor sigh nor groan)
With heavy thump, a lifeless lump,
They dropped down one by one.
BatujimDeath The JQUJS did from me ir bodies fly, -
a^^nulari^ * They fled to bliss or woe!
And every soul, it passed me by,
Like the whizz of my cross-bow!
204 DR. KOD6 KRISZITNA
SAMUEL TAYLOR COLERIDGE
The Wedding-Gttest
feareth thai « Spirit H
tiiOang to him;
of his bodily lift, ttnd
pHMctklh to relate his
HeAespkeththe
creatures of the calm,
Part 4
1 fear thee, ancient Mariner!
I fear thy skinny hand!
And thou art long, and lank, and brown,
As is the ribbed sea-sand.
I fear thee and thy glittering eye,
And thy skinny hand, so brown.' -
Fear not, fear not, thou Wedding-Guest!
This body dropt not down.
Alone, alone, all, all alone,
Alone on a wide wide sea!
And never a saint took pity on
My soul in agony.
The many men, so beautiful!
And they all dead did lie:
And a thousand thousand slimy things
Lived on; and so did I.
A»d ,™*h tis A,, j looked Upon the rotting sea,
should lire, and so r °
mn, ik dad And drew my eyes away;
I looked upon the rotting deck,
And there the dead men lay.
I looked to heaven, and tried to pray;
But or ever a prayer had gusht,
A wicked whisper came, and made
My heart as dry as dust.
I closed my lids, and kept them close,
And the balls like pulses beat;
For the sky and the sea, and the sea and the sky
Lay like a load on my weary eye,
And the dead were at my feet.
AN ANTHOLOGY OF ENGLISH POETRY 205
SAMUEL TAYLOR COLERIDGE
But the curst Ihethfbr -J^g CQ\^ SW£a t me l tec l from me i r limbs,
him in the eye of the
dead men. Nor rot nor reek did they:
The look with which they looked on me
Had never passed away.
An orphan's curse would drag to hell
A spirit from on high;
But oh! more horrible than that
Is the curse in a dead man's eye!
Seven days, seven nights, I saw that curse,
And yet I could not die.
™ and The moving Moon went up the sky,
CTijX. And no where did abide:
Mtm, mi a,, Mrs Softly she was going up,
Z'lZZl" And a star or two besideand everywhere the bhtesky belongs to them, and is Ihru :ip['i>i<tusl .r*/, n>i<* ii-i<> n.un, ..•',.."•,, n:i
their own natural homes, which they enter unannounced, as lords that are certainly expected and-ye;
there is a silent joy at their arrivalHer beams bemocked the sultry main,
Like April hoar-frost spread;
But where the ship's huge shadow lay,
The charm&l water burnt ahvay
A still and awful red.
By the kght of the Beyond the shadow of the ship,
MoonhebehoMetb _
 J
 . , , ,
 r
God's creatures of the I watched the water-snakes:
s™*1 cdm
- They moved in tracks of shining white,
And when they reared, the elfish light
Fell off in hoary flakes.
Within the shadow of the ship
I watched their rich attire:
Blue, glossy green, and velvet black,
They coiled and swam; and every track
Was a flash of golden fire.
206 DR. KOD6 KRISZITNA
SAMUEL TAYLOR COLERIDGE
Their beauty and their O happy living tfalllgs! nO tOIlgUe
hxi&n™- Their beauty might declare:
A spring of love gushed from my heart,
m buxeth them in his And I blessed them unaware:
Sure my kind saint took pity on me,
And I blessed them unaware.
The spett begins
break. The self-same moment I could pray;
And from my neck so free
The Albatross fell off, and sank
Like lead into the sea.
By grace of the holy
Mother, the ancient
J*A.anner ts
Part 5
Oh sleep! it is a gentle thing,
Beloved from pole to pole!
To Mary Queen the praise be given!
She sent the gentle sleep from Heaven,
That slid into my soul.
The silly buckets on the deck,
That had so long remained,
I dreamt that they were filled with dew;
And when I awoke, it rained.
My lips were wet, my throat was cold,
My garments all were dank;
Sure I had drunken in my dreams,
And still my body drank.
I moved, and could not feel my limbs:
I was so light - almost
I thought that I had died in sleep,
And was a bless&l ghost.
AN ANTHOLOGY OF ENGLISH POETRY 207
SAMUEL TAYLOR COLERIDGE
H,i**«h sounds »nd And soon I heard a roaring wind:
stetbstmnge sights and _ ,. , °
commotions in the sky It di d no t com e anear;
and the dement. g ^ ^fa Jg SQVm^ fr snO o k tflC Sails,
That were so thin and sere.
The upper air burst into life!
And a hundred fire-flags sheen,
To and fro they were hurried about!
And to and fro, and in and out,
The wan stars danced between.
And the coming wind did roar more loud,
And the sails did sigh like sedge;
And the rain poured down from one black cloud;
The Moon was at its edge.
The thick black cloud was cleft, and still
The Moon was at its side:
Like waters shot from some high crag,
The lightning fell with never a jag,
A river steep and wide.
The bodies <f the ship's The loud wind never reached the ship,
zmpftreinspitedi and .... , , . , .
the ship moves on; Yet now the ship moved on!
Beneath the lightning and the Moon
The dead men gave a groan.
They groaned, they stirred, they all uprose,
Nor spake, nor moved their eyes;
It had been strange, even in a dream,
To have seen those dead men rise.
The helmsman steered, the ship moved on;
Yet never a breeze up-blew;
The mariners all 'gan work the ropes,
Where they were wont to do;
They raised their limbs like lifeless tools -
We were a ghastly crew.
208 DR. KOD6 KRISZTTNA
SAMUEL TAYLOR COLERIDGE
The body of my brother's son
Stood by me, knee to knee:
The body and I pulled at one rope,
But he said nought to me.
by a* souk <f <i fear thee, ancient Mariner!'
TmtiteZ™ Be calm, thou Wedding-Guest!
roop of TVas not those souls that fled in pain,
nt TI— • 1 « • •
Which to their corses came again,
of tbtgnnrAzn s*int. jj u t a troop of spirits blest:
For when it dawned - they dropped their arms,
And clustered round the mast;
Sweet sounds rose slowly through their mouths,
And from their bodies passed.
Around, around, flew each sweet sound,
Then darted to the Sun;
Slowly the sounds came back again,
Now mixed, now one by one.
Sometimes a-dropping from the sky
I heard the sky-lark sing;
Sometimes all little birds that are,
How they seemed to fill the sea and air
With their sweet jargoning!
And now 'twas like all instruments,
Now like a lonely flute;
And now it is an angel's song,
That makes the heavens be mute.
It ceased; yet still the sails made on
A pleasant noise till noon,
A noise like of a hidden brook
In the leafy month of June,
That to the sleeping woods all night
Singeth a quiet tune.
AN ANTHOLOGY OF ENGLISH POETRY 209
SAMUEL TAYLOR COLERIDGE
The lonesome spirit
Till noon we quietly sailed on,
Yet never a breeze did breathe:
Slowly and smoothly went the ship,
Moved onward from beneath.
Under the keel nine fathom deep,
From the land of mist and snow,
fir as the Lm^ in The spirit slid: and it was he
obedience to the angelic r™ • < < •
troop, but stm n^imb That made the ship to go.
-nngtantz. The sails at noon left off their tune,
And the ship stood still also.
The Sun, right up above the mast,
Had fixed her to the ocean:
But in a minute she 'gan stir,
With a short uneasy motion -
Backwards and forwards half her length
With a short uneasy motion.
Then like a pawing horse let go,
She made a sudden bound:
It flung the blood into my head,
And I fell down in a swound.
The Polar Spirit's
fillow-dtmons, the
invisible inhabit nni\ iff'
the dement, takepart
;/l Ifh <\*iO!l£) Hftit tWO
of them relate, one to
the other, that penance
long and heavy jbr the
ancient Mariner hath
been accorded to the
Polnr Spirit, who
returneth
southward.
How long in that same fit I lay,
I have not to declare;
But ere my living life returned,
I heard and in my soul discerned
Two voices in the air.
Is it he ?* quoth one, Is this the man ?
By him who died on cross,
With his cruel bow he laid full low
The harmless Albatross.
210 DR. KOD6 KRISZTINA
SAMUEL TAYLOR COLERIDGE
The spirit who bideth by himself
In the land of mist and snow,
He loved the bird that loved the man
Who shot him with his bow.3
The other was a softer voice,
As soft as honey-dew:
Quoth he, The man hath penance done,
And penance more will do.'
Part 6
FIRST VOICE
'But tell me, tell me! speak again,
Thy soft response renewing —
What makes that ship drive on so fast?
What is the ocean doing?'
SECOND VOICE
'Still as a slave before his lord,
The ocean hath no blast;
His great bright eye most silently
Up to the Moon is cast -
If he may know which way to go;
For she guides him smooth or grim.
See, brother, see! how graciously
She looketh down on him.'
FIRST VOICE
The Mariner bath been <]$Ut Wn y drive s On that shi p SO faSt,
Without or wave or wind?'
cast into a trance; for
the angelic pmcr
cattseth the vessel t
SECOND VOICE
T h e air is cut away before,
And closes from behind.
AN ANTHOLOGY OF ENGLISH POETRY 211
SAMUEL TAYLOR COLERIDGE
Fly, brother, flyJ more high, more high!
Or we shall be belated:
For slow and slow that ship will go,
When the Mariner's trance is abated.1
The supernatural \ woke , an d WC WCTC Sailing On
motion is retarded: the . . . .
M^mr M^ »w As in a gentle weather:
hispnanu begin* Twas night, calm night, the moon was high;
The dead men stood together.
All stood together on the deck,
For a chamel-dungeon fitter:
All fixed on me their stony eyes,
That in the Moon did glitter.
The pang, the curse, with which they died,
Had never passed away:
I could not draw my eyes from theirs,
Nor turn them up to pray.
The mne hfinally And now this spell was snapt: once more
expiated, T - , , I viewed the ocean green,
And looked far forth, yet little saw
Of what had else been seen -
Like one, that on a lonesome road
Doth walk in fear and dread,
And having once turned round walks on,
And turns no more his head;
Because he knows, a frightful fiend
Doth close behind him tread.
But soon there breathed a wind on me,
Nor sound nor motion made:
Its path was not upon the sea,
In ripple or in shade.
212 DR. KOD6 KRISZITNA
SAMUEL TAYLOR COLERIDGE
It raised my hair, it fanned my cheek
Like a meadow-gale of spring -
It mingled strangely with my fears,
Yet it felt like a welcoming.
Swiftly, swiftly flew the ship,
Yet she sailed softly too:
Sweetly, sweetly blew the breeze -
On me alone it blew.
A nd the
Marii
* ancient oh! dream of joy! is this indeed
.»*&. country. The light-house top I see?
Is this the hill? is this the kirk?
Is this mine own countree?
We drifted o'er the harbour-bar,
And I with sobs did pray -
O let me be awake, my God!
Or let me sleep alway.
The harbour-bay was clear as glass,
So smoothly it was strewn!
And on the bay the moonlight lay,
And the shadow of the Moon.
The rock shone bright, the kirk no less,
That stands above the rock:
The moonlight steeped in silentness
The steady weathercock.
And the bay was white with silent light,
Till rising from the same,
The. angelic spirits Urns Full many shapes, that shadows were,
the dead bodkh
AN ANTHOLOGY OF ENGLISH POETRY 213
SAMUEL TAYLOR COLERIDGE
Aniqimrinthdr A little distance from the prow
Those cnmson shadows were:
I turned my eyes upon the deck -
Oh, Christ! what saw I there!
Each corse lay flat, lifeless and flat,
And, by the holy rood!
A man all light, a seraph-man,
On every corse there stood.
This seraph-band, each waved his hand:
It was a heavenly sight!
They stood as signals to the land,
Each one a lovely light;
This seraph-band, each waved his hand,
No voice did they impart -
No voice; but oh! the silence sank
Like music on my heart.
But soon I heard the dash of oars,
I heard the Pilot's cheer;
My head was turned perforce away
And I saw a boat appear.
The Pilot and the Pilot's boy,
I heard them coming fast:
Dear Lord in Heaven! it was a joy
The dead men could not blast.
I saw a third -1 heard his voice:
It is the Hermit good!
He singeth loud his godly hymns
That he makes in the wood.
He'll shrieve my soul, he'll wash away
The Albatross's blood.
214 DR. KOD6 KRISZTINA
SAMUEL TAYLOR COLERIDGE
Part 7
ne Hermit of the This Hermit good lives in that wood
**"< Which slopes down to the sea.
How loudly his sweet voice he rears!
He loves to talk with marineres
That come from a far countree.
He kneels at morn, and noon, and eve -
He hath a cushion plump:
It is the moss that wholly hides
The rotted old oak-stump.
The skiff-boat neared: I heard them talk,
TYhy, this is strange, I trow!
Where are those lights so many and fair,
That signal made but now?*
'Strange, by my faith!' the Hermit said -
And they answered not our cheer!
The planks looked warped! and see those sails,
How thin they are and sere!
I never saw aught like to them,
Unless perchance it were
Brown skeletons of leaves that lag
My forest-brook along;
When the ivy-tod is heavy with snow,
And the owlet whoops to the wolf below,
That eats the she-wolfs young.'
T>ear Lord! it hath a fiendish look -
(The Pilot made reply)
I am a-feared' - Tush on, push on!'
Said the Hermit cheerily.
AN ANTHOLOGY OF ENGLISH POETRY 215
SAMUEL TAYLOR COLERIDGE
The boat came closer to the ship,
But I nor spake nor stirred;
The boat came close beneath the ship,
And straight a sound was heard.
The dip sudden*, Under the water it rumbled on,
Still louder and more dread:
It reached the ship, it split the bay;
The ship went down like lead.
The andetu Mariner k Stunned by that loud and dreadful sound,
w«< ;„.*,««-, which sky and ocean smote,
Like one that hath been seven days drowned
My body lay afloat;
But swift as dreams, myself I found
Within the Pilot's boat.
Upon the whirl, where sank the ship,
The boat spun round and round;
And all was still, save that the hill
Was telling of the sound.
I moved my lips - the Pilot shrieked
And fell down in a fit;
The holy Hermit raised his eyes,
And prayed where he did sit.
I took the oars: the Pilot's boy,
Who now doth crazy go,
Laughed loud and long, and all the while
His eyes went to and fro.
Til! ha!' quoth he, full plain I see,
The Devil knows how to row.'
And now, all in my own countree,
I stood on the firm land!
The Hermit stepped forth from the boat,
And scarcely he could stand.
216 DR. KOD6 KRISZI1NA
SAMUEL TAYLOR COLERIDGE
The undent Mariner 'Q shrieve me, shrieve me, holy man!*
earnestly entreaieth the
Hermit to shrieve him; The Hermit crossed his brow,
*2 'mbiT™ "fllfi ^ a y <3
U
^
C
^' q uot n nc ) 1 bid thee say -
What manner of man art thou?'
Forthwith this frame of mine was wrenched
With a woful agony,
Which forced me to begin my tale;
And then it left me free.
And ever and anon Since then, at an uncertain hour,
throughout his fiaur e j ^ agon y returns:
life an agony & 3
constrmneth him to And till my ghastly tale is told,
trwlfrom land t o ^ j ^ ^ ^ ^ ^^ ^
I pass, like night, from land to land;
I have strange power of speech;
That moment that his face I see,
I know the man that must hear me:
To him my tale I teach.
What loud uproar bursts from that door!
The wedding-guests are there:
But in the garden-bower the bride
And bride-maids singing are:
And hark the little vesper bell,
Which biddeth me to prayer!
O Wedding-Guest! this soul hath been
Alone on a wide wide sea:
So lonely 'twas, that God himself
Scarce seeme'd there to be.
O sweeter than the marriage-feast,
Tis sweeter far to me,
To walk together to the kirk
With a goodly company! -
AN ANTHOLOGY OF ENGLISH POETRY 217
SAMUEL TAYLOR COLERIDGE
To walk together to the kirk,
And all together pray,
While each to his great Father bends,
Old men, and babes, and loving friends
And youths and maidens gay!
is Farewell, farewell! but this I tell
w
 To
 tf*^ ^on Wedding-Guest!
God m*<k a»rf He prayeth well, who loveth well
Both man and bird and beast.
He prayeth best, who loveth best
All things both great and small;
For the dear God who loveth us,
He made and loveth all.
The Mariner, whose eye is bright,
Whose beard with age is hoar,
Is gone: and now the Wedding-Guest
Turned from the bridegroom's door.
He went like one that hath been stunned,
And is of sense forlorn:
A sadder and a wiser man,
He rose the morrow morn.
(1798) (1817)
218 DR. KOD6 KRISZITNA
SAMUEL TAYLOR COLERIDGE
Dejection: an Ode
Late, late yestreen I saw the new moon,
With the old moon in her arms;
And I fear, I fear, my master dear!
We shall have a deadly storm.
(Ballad of Sir Patrick Spmce)
I
Well! If the Bard was weather-wise, who made
The grand old ballad of Sir Patrick Spence,
This night, so tranquil now, will not go hence
Unroused by winds, that pry a busier trade
Than those which mould yon cloud in lazy flakes,
Or the dull sobbing draft, that moans and rakes
Upon the strings of this Aeolian lute,
Which better far were mute.
For lo! the New-moon winter-bright!
And overspread with phantom light,
(With swimming phantom light o'erspread
But rimmed and circled by a silver thread)
I see the old Moon in her lap, foretelling
The coming-on of rain and squally blast.
And oh! that even now the gust were swelling,
And the slant night-shower driving loud and fast!
Those sounds which oft have raised me, whilst they awed,
And sent my soul abroad,
Might now perhaps their wonted impulse give,
Might startle this dull pain, and make it move and live!
II
A grief without a pang, void, dark, and drear,
A stifled, drowsy, unimpassioned grief,
Which finds no natural outlet, no relief,
In word, or sigh, or tear -
O Lady! in this wan and heartless mood,
To other thoughts by yonder throstle wooed,
AN ANTHOLOGY OF ENGLISH POETRY 219
SAMUEL TAYLOR COLERIDGE
All this long eve, so balmy and serene,
Have I been gazing on the western sky,
And its peculiar tint of yellow green:
And still I gaze -and with how blank an eye!
And those thin clouds above, in flakes and bars,
That give away their motion to the stars;
Those stars, that glide behind them or between,
Now sparkling, now bedimmed, but always seen:
Yon crescent Moon, as fixed as if it grew
In its own cloudless, starless lake of blue;
I see them all so excellently fair,
I see, not feel, how beautiful they are!
m
My genial spirits fail;
And what can these avail
To lift the smothering weight from off my breast?
It were a vain endeavour,
Though I should gaze forever
On that green light that lingers in the west:
I may not hope from outward forms to win
The passion and the life, whose fountains are within.
IV
O Lady! we receive but what we give,
And in our life alone does Nature live:
Ours is her wedding-garment, ours her shroud!
And would we aught behold, of higher worth,
Than that inanimate cold world allowed
To the poor loveless ever-anxious crowd,
Ah! from the soul itself must issue forth
A ligjit, a glory, a fair luminous cloud
Enveloping the Earth -
And from the soul itself must there be sent
A sweet and potent voice, of its own birth,
Of all sweet sounds the life and element!
220 DR. KOD6 KRISZITNA
SAMUEL TAYLOR COLERIDGE
O pure of heart! thou need'st not ask of me
What this strong music in the soul may be!
What, and wherein it doth exist,
This light, this glory, this fair luminous mist,
This beautiful and beauty-making power.
Joy, virtuous Lady! Joy that ne'er was given,
Save to the pure, and in their purest hour,
Life, and Life's effluence, cloud at once and shower,
Joy, Lady! is the spirit and the power,
Which wedding Nature to us gives in dower,
A new Earth and new Heaven,
Undreamt of by the sensual and the proud -
Joy is the sweet voice, Joy the luminous cloud -
We in ourselves rejoice!
And thence flows all that charms or ear or sight,
All melodies the echoes of that voice,
All colours a suffusion from that light.
VI
There was a time when, though my path was rough,
This joy within me dallied with distress,
And all misfortunes were but as the stuff
Whence Fancy made me dreams of happiness:
For hope grew round me, like the twining vine,
And fruits, and foliage, not my own, seemed mine.
But now afflictions bow me down to earth:
Nor care I that they rob me of my mirth;
But oh! each visitation
Suspends what Nature gave me at my birth,
My shaping spirit of Imagination.
For not to think of what I needs must feel,
But to be still and patient, all I can;
And haply by abstruse research to steal
From my own nature all the natural man -
This was my sole resource, my only plan:
Till that which suits a part infects the whole,
And now is almost grown the habit of my soul.
AN ANTHOLOGY OF ENGLISH POETRY 221
SAMUEL TAYLOR COLERIDGE
vn
Hence, viper thoughts, that coil around my mind,
Reality's dark dream!
I turn from you, and listen to the wind,
Which long has raved unnoticed. What a scream
Of agony by torture lengthened out
That lute sent forth! Thou Wind, that rav"st without,
Bare crag, or mountain-tairn, or blasted tree,
Or pine-grove whither woodman never domb,
Or lonely house, long held the witches' home,
Methinks were fitter instruments for thee,
Mad Lutanist! who in this month of showers,
Of dark-brown gardens, and of peeping flowers,
Mak'st Devils' yule, with worse than wintry song,
The blossoms, buds, and timorous leaves among.
Thou actor, perfect in all tragic sounds!
Thou mighty poet, e'en to frenzy bold!
What tell'st thou now about?
Tis of the rushing of an host in rout,
With groans, of trampled men, with smarting wounds -
At once they groan with pain, and shudder with the cold!
But hush! there is a pause of deepest silence!
And all that noise, as of a rushing crowd,
With groans, and tremulous shudderings - all is over -
It tells another rale, with sounds less deep and loud!
A tale of less affright,
And tempered with delight,
As Otway's self had framed the tender lay -
Tis of a little child
Upon a lonesome wild,
Not far from home, but she hath lost her way:
And now moans low in bitter grief and fear,
And now screams loud, and hopes to make her mother hear.
vra
Tis midnight, but small thoughts have I of sleep:
Full seldom may my friend such vigils keep!
Visit her, gentle Sleep! with wings of healing,
222 DR. KOD6 KRISZIINA
SAMUEL TAYLOR COLERIDGE
And may this storm be but a mountain-birth,
May all the stars hang bright above her dwelling,
Silent as though they watched the sleeping Earth!
With light heart may she rise,
Gay fancy, cheerful eyes,
Joy lift her spirit, joy attune her voice;
To her may all things live, from pole to pole,
Their life the eddying of her living soul!
O simple spirit, guided from above,
Dear Lady! friend devoutest of my choice,
Thus mayst thou ever, evermore rejoice.
(1802) (1817)
AN ANTHOLOGY OF ENGLISH POETRY 223
GEORGE GORDON, LORD BYRON
(1788-1824)
He was born in London in 1788. His father, Captain John Byron, was
a rake and fortune-hunter, who died when his son was only three years old.
His mother, Catherine Gordon of Gight, was the last descendant of a line
of lawless Scottish lairds. Byron came into the title when he was only ten
years old. He was educated at Harrow and Trinity College, Cambridge.
When he left the university he started to travel in Europe with a friend. In
1815 he married Anne Isabella Milbanke, an heiress, from whom he
separated in 1816. He thereupon left England, with the intention of never
returning, embittered by the strictures of what he regarded as a
hypocritical society. Mostly in the company of the Shelleys he travelled to
Switzerland and Venice which, with Ravenna, Pisa, and Genoa, became
his headquarters. In 1822 Byron and Leigh Hunt (a poet and editor of
political and literary periodicals for the reformist middle class) joined in
the production dTbelAbmd magazine. Ayear later in 1823 Byron set out
to join the Greek insurgents, and died of fever at Missolonghi in April
1824. Byron's poetry was immensely popular - a popularity which owed
much to the novelty of his oriental scenery, to the romantic character of
the Byronic hero and to the real beauty of his verse, and sealed his
reputation as the foremost poet of liberty in Europe.
She Walks in Beauty
She walks in beauty, like the night
Of cloudless climes and starry skies;
And all that's best of dark and bright
Meet in her aspect and her eyes:
Thus mellowed to that tender light
Which heaven to gaudy day denies.
One shade the more, one ray the less,
Had half impaired the nameless grace
Which waves in every raven tress,
Or softly lightens o'er her face;
Where thoughts serenely sweet express
224 DR. KOD6 KK1SZTINA
GEORGE GORDON, LORD BYRON
H ow pure, how dear their dwelling-place.
And on that cheek, and o'er that brow,
So soft, so calm, yet eloquent,
The smiles that win, the tints that glow,
But tell of days in goodness spent,
A mind at peace with all below,
A heart whose love is innocent!
118151
Prometheus
Titan! to whose immortal eyes
The sufferings of mortality,
Seen in their sad reality,
Were not as things that gods despise;
What was thy pity's recompense?
A silent suffering, and intense;
The rock, the vulture, and the chain,
All that the proud can feel of pain,
The agony they do not show,
The suffocating sense of woe,
Which speaks but in its loneliness,
And then is jealous lest the sky
Should have a listener, nor will sigh
Until its voice is echoless.
Titan! to thee the strife was given
Between the suffering and the will,
Which torture where they cannot kill;
And the inexorable Heaven,
And the deaf tyranny of Fate,
The riding principle of Hate,
Which for its pleasure doth create
The things it may annihilate,
Refus'd thee even the boon to die:
The wretched gift Eternity
Was thine - and thou hast borne it well.
AN ANTHOLOGY OF ENGLISH POETRY 225
GEORGE GORDON, LORD BYRON
All that the Thunderer wrung from thee
Was but the menace which flung back
On him the torments of thy rack;
The fate thou didst so well foresee,
But would not to appease him tell;
And in thy Silence was his Sentence,
And in his Soul a vain repentance,
And evil dread so ill dissembled,
That in his hand the lightnings trembled.
Thy Godlike crime was to be kind,
To render with thy precepts less
The sum of human wretchedness,
And strengthen Man with his own mind;
But baffled as thou wert from high,
Still in thy patient energy,
In the endurance, and repulse
Of thine impenetrable Spirit,
Which Earth and Heaven could not convulse,
A mighty lesson we inherit:
Thou art a symbol and a sign
To Mortals of their fate and force;
Like thee, Man is in part divine,
A troubled stream from a pure source;
And Man in portions can foresee
His own funereal destiny;
His wretchedness, and his resistance,
And his sad unallied existence:
To which his Spirit may oppose
Itself—and equal to all woes,
And a firm will, and a deep sense,
Which even in torture can descry
Its own concentered recompense,
Triumphant where it dares defy,
And making Death a Victory.
(1816) (1817)
226 DR. KOD6 KRISZITNA
GEORGE GORDON, LORD BYRON
Darkness
I had a dream, which was not all a dream.
The bright sun was extinguish'd, and the stars
Did wander darkling in the eternal space,
Rayless, and pathless, and the icy earth
Swung blind and blackening in the moonless air;
Morn came and went - and came, and brought no day,
And men forgot their passions in the dread
Of this their desolation; and all hearts
Were chill'd into a selfish prayer for light:
And they did live by watchfires - and the thrones,
The palaces of crowned kings - the huts,
The habitations of all things which dwell,
Were burnt for beacons; cities were consum'd,
And men were gathered round their blazing homes
To look once more into each other's face;
Happy were those who dwelt within the eye
Of the volcanos, and their mountain-torch:
A fearful hope was all the world contain'd;
Forests were set on fire - but hour by hour
They fell and faded - and the crackling trunks
Extinguished with a crash - and all was black.
The brows of men by the despairing light
Wore an unearthly aspect, as by fits
The flashes fell upon them; some lay down
And hid their eyes and wept; and some did rest
Their chins upon their clenched hands, and smil'd;
And others hurried to and fro, and fed
Their funeral piles with facl, and look*d up
With mad disquietude on the dull sky,
The pall of a past world; and then again
With curses cast them down upon the dust,
And gnashed their teeth and howl'd: the wild birds shriektt
And, terrified, did flutter on the ground,
And flap their useless wings; the wildest brutes
Came tame and tremulous; and vipers crawPd
And twin'd themselves among the multitude,
AN ANTHOLOGY OF ENGLISH POETRY 227
GEORGE GORDON, LORD BYRON
Hissing, but stingless - they were slain for food.
And War, which for a moment was no more,
Did glut himself again: a meal was bought
With blood, and each sate sullenly apart
Gorging himself in gloom: no love was left;
All earth was but one thought - and that was death
Immediate and inglorious; and the pang
Of famine fed upon all entrails - men
Died, and their bones were tombless as their flesh;
The meagre by the meagre were devoured,
Even dogs assail'd their masters, all save one,
And he was faithful to a corpse, and kept
The birds and beasts and famish'd men at bay,
Till hunger clung them, or the dropping dead
Lur'd their lank jaws; himself sought out no food,
But with a piteous and perpetual moan,
And a quick desolate cry, licking the hand
Which answered not with a caress - he died.
The crowd was famish'd by degrees; but two
Of an enormous city did survive,
And they were enemies: they met beside
The dying embers of an altar-place
Where had been heap'd a mass of holy things
For an unholy usage; they rak*d up,
And shivering scrap'd with their cold skeleton hands
The feeble ashes, and their feeble breath
Blew for a little life, and made a flame
Which was a mockery; then they lifted up
Their eyes as it grew lighter, and beheld
Each other's aspects - saw, and shrieked, and died -
Even of their mutual hideousness they died,
Unknowing who he was upon whose brow
Famine had written Fiend.
The world was void,
The populous and the powerful was a lump,
Seasonless, herbless, treeless, manless, lifeless -
A lump of death - a chaos of hard clay.
The rivers, lakes and ocean all stood still,
228 DR. KOD6 KRISZTTNA
GEORGE GORDON, LORD BYRON
And nothing stirrM within their silent depths;
Ships sailorless lay rotting on the sea,
And their masts fell down piecemeal: as they dropp'd
They slept on the abyss without a surge -
The waves were dead; the tides were in their grave,
The moon, their mistress, had expir'd before;
The winds were wither'd in the stagnant air,
And the clouds perish'd; Darkness had no need
Of aid from them - She was the Universe.
118161 118171
Don Juan
From Canto 1
(Excerpt)
I want a hero: an uncommon want,
When every year and month sends forth a new one,
Till, after cloying the gazettes with cant,
The age discovers he is not the true one;
Of such as these I should not care to vaunt,
Fll therefore take our ancient friend Don Juan —
We all have seen him, in the pantomime,
Sent to the devil somewhat ere his time.
90
Young Juan wander'd by the glassy brooks,
Thinking unutterable things; he threw
Himself at length within the leafy nooks
Where the wild branch of the cork forest grew;
There poets find materials for their books,
And every now and then we read them through,
So that their plan and prosody are eligible,
Unless, like Wordsworth, they prove unintelligible.
AN ANTHOLOGY OF ENGLISH POETRY 229
GEORGE GORDON, LORD BYRON
91
He, Juan (and not Wordsworth), so pursued
His self-communion with his own high soul,
Until his mighty heart, in its great mood,
Had mitigated part, though not the whole
Of its disease; he did the best he could
With things not very subject to control,
And turn'd, without perceiving his condition,
Like Coleridge, into a metaphysician.
92
He thought about himself, and the whole earth
Of man the wonderful, and of the stars,
And how the deuce they ever could have birth;
And then he thought of earthquakes, and of wars,
How many miles the moon might have in girth,
Of air-balloons, and of the many bars
To perfect knowledge of the boundless skies; -
And then he thought of Donna Julia's eyes.
93
In thoughts like these true wisdom may discern
Longings sublime, and aspirations high,
Which some are born with, but the most part learn
To plague themselves withal, they know not why:
T was strange that one so young should thus concern
His brain about the action of the sky;
If you think't was philosophy that this did,
I can't help thinking puberty assisted.
230 DR. KOD6 KRISZI1NA
GEORGE GORDON, LORD BYRON
94
He pored upon the leaves, and on the flowers,
And heard a voice in all the winds; and then
He thought of wood-nymphs and immortal bowers,
And how the goddesses came down to men:
He miss'd the pathway, he forgot the hours,
And when he looked upon his watch again,
He found how much old Time had been a winner -
He also found that he had lost his dinner.
(18191
On This Day I Complete My Thirty-Sixth Year
Missolonghi, Jan. 22,1824
Tis time this heart should be unmoved,
Since others it hath ceased to move:
Yet, though I cannot be beloved,
Still let me love!
My days are in the yellow leaf;
The flowers and fruits of love are gone;
The worm, the canker, and the grief,
Are mine alone!
The fire that on my bosom preys
Is lone as some volcanic isle;
No torch is kindled at its blaze -
A funeral pile!
The hope, the fear, the jealous care,
The exalted portion of the pain
And power of love, I cannot share,
But wear the chain.
AN ANTHOLOGY OF ENGLISH POETRY 231
GEORGE GORDON, LORD BYRON
But 'tis not thus -and 'tis not here -
Such thoughts should shake my soul, nor now,
Where glory decks the hero's bier,
Or binds his brow.
The sword, the banner, and the field,
Glory and Greece, around me see!
The Spartan, borne upon his shield,
Was not more free.
Awake! (not Greece - she is awake!)
Awake, my spirit! Think througji whom
Thy life-blood tracks its parent lake,
And then strike home!
Tread those reviving passions down,
Unworthy manhood! - unto thee
Indifferent should the smile or frown
Of beauty be.
If thou regret'st thy youth, why live?
The land of honourable death
Is here: - up to the field, and give
Away thy breath!
Seek out -less often sought than found -
A soldier's grave, for thee the best;
Then look around, and choose thy ground,
And take thy rest
(18241
232 DR. KOD6 KR1SZTINA
PERCY BYSSHE SHELLEY
(1792-1822)
Shelley was born in Field Place, Sussex, in 1792. He was a descendant
of Sussex aristocrats from early in the seventeenth century. He was
educated at Eton and University College, Oxford. Shelley was
peremptorily expelled from Oxford after having written and circulating a
pamphlet on The Necessity of Atheism. In the same year he married Harriet
Westbrook from whom he separated after three years of a wandering life.
He left England in 1814 with Mary Godwin, to whom he was married in
1816 after the unhappy Harriet drowned herself in the Serpentine. In the
same year began Shelley's friendship with Byron. In 1818 Shelley left for
Italy and spent the summer in Byron's villa near Este. At the end of 1819
the Shelleys moved to Pisa, where he wrote some of his finest lyrics.
Shelley removed in 1821 to Lerici on the shores of the bay of Spezia.
Shelley began working on The Triumph of Lift in 1822, but was left
unfinished due to his early death. The work was published in 1824. On
July 8,1822, Shelley and Edward Williams were sailing their open boat,
when a violent squall swamped the boat. When several days later the
bodies were washed ashore they were cremated, and Shelley's ashes were
buried in the Protestant Cemetery at Rome. Shelley still enjoys an
enormous popularity today. His poetry is often considered to be musical,
and as Swinburne said: "He was alone the perfect singing-god; his
thoughts, words, deeds all sang together.. .the master-singer of our
modern race and age."
Ozymandias
I met a traveller from an antique land
Who said: 'Two vast and trunkless legs of stone
Stand in the desert. Near them on the sand,
Half sunk, a shattered visage lies, whose frown
And wrinkled lip and sneer of cold command
Tell that its sculptor well those passions read
Which yet survive, stamped on these lifeless things,
The hand that mocked them and the heart that fed.
AN ANTHOLOGY OF ENGLISH POETRY 233
PERCY BYSSHE SHELLEY
And on the pedestal these words appear:
'My name is Ozymandias, King of Kings:
Look on my works, ye mighty, and despair!'
Nothing beside remains. Round the decay
Of that colossal wreck, boundless and bare,
The lone and level sands stretch far away.
(1817) (1818)
England in 1819
An old, mad, blind, despised, and dying king, -
Princes, the dregs of their dull race, who flow
Through public scorn, -mud from a muddy spring, -
Rulers who neither see, nor feel, nor know,
But leech-like to their fainting country cling,
Till they drop, blind in blood, without a blow, -
A people starved and stabbed in the untilled field, -
An army, which liberticide and prey
Makes as a two-edged sword to all who wield, —
Golden and sanguine laws which tempt and slay;
Religion Christless, Godless - a book sealed;
A Senate, - Time's worst statute unrepealed, -
Are graves from which a glorious Phantom may
Burst, to illumine our tempestuous day.
(1819) (1839)
Ode to the West Wind
O wild West Wind, thou breath of Autumn's being,
Thou, from whose unseen presence the leaves dead
Are driven, like ghosts from an enchanter fleeing,
Yellow, and black, and pale, and hectic red,
Pestilence-stricken multitudes: O thou,
Who chariotest to their dark wintry bed
234 DR. KOD6 KRISZITNA
PERCY BYSSHE SHELLEY
The winged seeds, where they lie cold and low,
Each like a corpse within its grave, until
Thine azure sister of the Spring shall blow
Her clarion o'er the dreaming earth, and fill
(Driving sweet buds like flocks to feed in air)
With living hues and odours plain and hill:
Wild Spirit, which art moving everywhere;
Destroyer and preserver; hear, O hear!
Thou on whose stream, 'mid the steep sky's commotion,
Loose clouds like earth's decaying leaves are shed,
Shook from the tangled boughs of heaven and ocean,
Angels of rain and lightning; there are spread
On the blue surface of thine airy surge,
Like the bright hair uplifted from the head
Of some fierce Maenad, even from the dim verge
Of the horizon to the zenith's height -
The locks of the approaching storm. Thou dirge
Of the dying year, to which this closing night
Will be the dome of a vast sepulchre,
Vaulted with all thy congregated might
Of vapours, from whose solid atmosphere
Black rain, and fire, and hail, will burst: O hear!
Thou who didst waken from his summer dreams,
The blue Mediterranean, where he lay,
Lulled by the coil of his crystalline streams,
AN ANTHOLOGY OF ENGLISH POETRY 235
PERCY BYSSHE SHELLEY
Beside a pumice isle in Baiae*s bay,
And saw in sleep old palaces and towers
Quivering within the wave's intenser day,
All overgrown with azure moss and flowers
So sweet, the sense faints picturing them! Thou
For whose path the Atlantic's level powers
Cleave themselves into chasms, while far below
The sea-blooms and the oozy woods which wear
The sapless foliage of the ocean, know
Thy voice, and suddenly grow grey with fear,
And tremble and despoil themselves: O hear!
If I were a dead leaf thou mightest bear;
If I were a swift cloud to fly with thee;
A wave to pant beneath thy power, and share
The impulse of thy strength, only less free
Than thou, O uncontrollable! If even
I were as in my boyhood, and could be
The comrade of thy wanderings over heaven,
As then, when to outstrip the skiey speed
Scarce seemed a vision, I would ne'er have striven
As thus with thee in prayer in my sore need.
O, lift me as a wave, a leaf, a cloud!
I fall upon the thorns of life! I bleed!
A heavy weight of hours has chained and bowed
One too like thee: tameless, and swift, and proud.
236 DR. KOD6 KRISZTINA
PERCY BYSSHE SHELLEY
Make me thy lyre, even as the forest is:
What if my leaves are falling like its own!
The tumult of thy mighty harmonies
Will take from both a deep autumnal tone,
Sweet though in sadness. Be thou, Spirit fierce,
My spirit! be thou me, impetuous one!
Drive my dead thoughts over the universe
Like withered leaves, to quicken a new birth;
And, by the incantation of this verse,
Scatter, as from an unextinguished hearth
Ashes and sparks, my words among mankind!
Be through my lips to unawakened earth
The trumpet of a prophecy! O Wind,
If Winter comes, can Spring be far behind?
(1819) (1820)
The Mask of Anarchy
Written on the occasion of the massacre carried out by the British
Government at Peterloo, Manchester 1819
As I lay asleep in Italy
There came a voice from over the Sea,
And with great power it forth led me
To walk in the visions of Poesy.
I met Murder on the way -
He had a mask like Castlereagh -
Very smooth he looked, yet grim;
Seven blood-hounds followed him:
AN ANTHOLOGY OF ENGLISH POETRY 237
PERCY BYSSHE SHELLEY
All were fat; and well they might
Be in admirable plight,
For one by one, and two by two,
He tossed the human hearts to chew
Which from his wide cloak he drew.
Next came Fraud, and he had on,
Like Eldon, an ermined gown;
His big tears, for he wept well,
Turned to mill-stones as they fell.
And the little children, who
Round his feet played to and fro,
Thinking every tear a gem,
Had their brains knocked out by them.
Clothed with the Bible, as with light,
And the shadows of the night,
Like Sidmouth, next, Hypocrisy
On a crocodile rode by.
And many more Destructions played
In this ghastly masquerade,
All disguised, even to the eyes,
Like Bishops, lawyers, peers, or spies.
Last came Anarchy: he rode
On a white horse, splashed with blood;
He was pale even to the lips,
Like Death in the Apocalypse.
And he wore a kingly crown;
And in his grasp a sceptre shone;
On his brow this mark I saw -
1 AM GOD, AND KING, AND LAW!'
With a pace stately and fast,
Over English land he passed,
Trampling to a mire of blood
The adoring multitude.
238 DR. KOD6 KRISZTTNA
PERCY BYSSHE SHELLEY
And a mighty troop around,
With their trampling shook the ground,
Waving each a bloody sword,
For the service of their Lord.
And with glorious triumph, they
Rode through England proud and gay,
Drunk as with intoxication
Of the wine of desolation.
O*er fields and towns, from sea to sea,
Passed the Pageant swift and free,
Tearing up, and trampling down;
Till they came to London town.
And each dweller, panic-stricken,
Felt his heart with terror sicken
Hearing the tempestuous cry
Of the triumph of Anarchy.
For with pomp to meet him came,
Clothed in arms like blood and flame,
The hired murderers, who did sing
Thou art God, and Law, and King.
"We have waited, weak and lone
For thy coming, Mighty One!
Our Purses are empty, our swords are cold,
Give us glory, and blood, and gold.1
Lawyers and priests, a motley crowd,
To the earth their pale brows bowed;
Like a bad prayer not over loud,
Whispering - Thou art Law and God.' -
Then all cried with one accord,
Thou art King, and God and Lord;
Anarchy, to thee we bow,
Be thy name made holy now!'
AN ANTHOLOGY OF ENGLISH POETRY 239
PERCY BYSSHE SHELLEY
And Anarchy, the skeleton,
Bowed and grinned to every one,
As well as if his education
Had cost ten millions to the nation.
For he knew the Palaces
Of our Kings were rightly his;
His the sceptre, crown and globe,
And the gold-inwoven robe.
So he sent his slaves before
To seize upon the Bank and Tower,
And was proceeding with intent
To meet his pensioned Parliament
When one fled past, a maniac maid,
And her name was Hope, she said:
But she looked more like Despair,
And she cried out in the air:
'My father Time is weak and gray
With waiting for a better day;
See how idiot-like he stands,
Fumbling with his palsied hands!
He has had child after child,
And the dust of death is piled
Over every one but me -
Misery, oh, Misery!'
Then she lay down in the street,
Right before the horses' feet,
Expecting, with a patient eye,
Murder, Fraud, and Anarchy.
When between her and her foes
A mist, a light, an image rose,
Small at first, and weak, and frail
Like the vapour of a vale:
240 DR. KOD6 KRISZITNA
PERCY BYSSHE SHELLEY
Till as clouds grow on the blast,
Like tower-crowned giants striding fast,
And glare with lightnings as they fly,
And speak in thunder to the sky,
It grew - a Shape arrayed in mail
Brighter than the viper's scale,
And upborne on wings whose grain
Was as the light of sunny rain.
On its helm, seen far away,
A planet, like the Morning's, lay;
And those plumes its light rained through
Like a shower of crimson dew.
With step as soft as wind it passed
O'er the heads of men - so fast
That they knew the presence there,
And looked, - but all was empty air.
As flowers beneath May's footstep waken,
As stars from Night's loose hair are shaken,
As waves arise when loud winds call,
Thoughts sprung where'er that step did fall.
And the prostrate multitude
Looked - and ankle-deep in blood,
Hope, that maiden most serene,
Was walking with a quiet mien:
And Anarchy, the ghastly birth,
Lay dead earth upon the earth;
The Horse of Death tameless as wind
Fled, and with his hoofs did grind
To dust the murderers thronged behind.
A rushing light of clouds and splendour,
A sense awakening and yet tender
Was heard and felt - and at its close
These words of joy and fear arose
AN ANTHOLOGY OF ENGLISH POETRY 241
PERCY BYSSHE SHELLEY
As if their own indignant Earth
Which gave the sons of England birth
Had felt their blood upon her brow,
And shuddering with a mother's throe
Had turned every drop of blood
By which her face had been bedewed
To an accent unwithstood, -
As if her heart had cried aloud:
'Men of England, heirs of Glory,
Heroes of unwritten story,
Nurslings of one mighty Mother,
Hopes of her, and one another;
'Rise like Lions after slumber
In unvanquishabie number,
Shake your chains to earth like dew
Which in sleep had fallen on you -
Ye are many - they are few.
'What is Freedom? - ye can tell
That which slavery is, too well -
For its very name has grown
To an echo of your own.
Tis to work and have such pay
As just keeps life from day to day
In your limbs, as in a cell
For the tyrants' use to dwell,
'So that ye for them are made
Loom, and plough, and sword, and spade,
With or without your own will bent
To their defence and nourishment.
Tis to see your children weak
With their mothers pine and peak,
When the winter winds are bleak, -
They are dying whilst I speak.
242 DR. KOD6 KRISZITNA
PERCY EYSSHE SHELLEY
Tis to hunger for such diet
As the rich man in his riot
Casts to the fat dogs that lie
Surfeiting beneath his eye;
Tis to let the Ghost of Gold
Take from Toil a thousandfold
More that e'er its substance could
In the tyrannies of old.
Taper coin - that forgery
Of the title-deeds, which ye
Hold to something of the worth
Of the inheritance of Earth.
Tis to be a slave in soul
And to hold no strong control
Over your own wills, but be
All that others make of ye.
'And at length when ye complain
With a murmur weak and vain
Tis to see the Tyrant's crew
Bide over your wives and you -
Blood is on the grass like dew.
Then it is to feel revenge
Fiercely thirsting to exchange
Blood for blood - and wrong for wrong -
Do not thus when ye are strong.
'Birds find rest, in narrow nest
When weary of their winged quest
Beasts find fare, in woody lair
When storm and snow are in the air.
'Asses, swine, have litter spread
And with fitting food are fed;
All things have a home but one -
Thou, Oh, Englishman, hast none!
AN ANTHOLOGY OF ENGLISH POETRY 243
PERCY BYSSHE SHELLEY
This is slavery - savage men
Or wild beasts within a den
Would endure not as ye do -
But such ills they never knew.
cWhat art thou Freedom? O! could slaves
Answer from their living graves
This demand - tyrants would flee
Like a dream's dim imagery:
Thou art not, as impostors say,
A shadow soon to pass away,
A superstition, and a name
Echoing from the cave of Fame.
Tor the labourer thou art bread,
And a comely table spread
From his daily labour come
In a neat and happy home.
Thou art clothes, and fire, and food
For the trampled multitude -
No - in countries that are free
Such starvation cannot be
As in England now we see.
To the rich thou art a check,
When his foot is on the neck
Of his victim, thou dost make
That he treads upon a snake.
Thou art Justice - ne'er for gold
May thy righteous laws be sold
As laws are in England - thou
Shield'st alike the high and low.
Thou art Wisdom - Freemen never
Dream that God will damn for ever
All who think those things untrue
Of which Priests make such ado.
244 DR. KOD6 KRISZTTNA
PERCY EYSSHE SHELLEY
Thou art Peace - never by thee
Would blood and treasure wasted be
As tyrants wasted them, when all
Leagued to quench thy flame in Gaul.
•What if English toil and blood
Was poured forth, even as a flood?
It availed, Oh, Liberty,
To dim, but not extinguish thee.
Thou art Love - the rich have kissed
Thy feet, and like him following Christ,
Give their substance to the free
And through the rough world follow thee,
'Or turn their wealth to arms, and make
War for thy beloved sake
On wealth, and war, and fraud - whence they
Drew the power which is their prey.
'Science, Poetry, and Thought
Are thy lamps; they make the lot
Of the dwellers in a cot
So serene, they curse it not.
'Spirit, Patience, Gentleness,
All that can adorn and bless
Art thou - let deeds, not words, express
Thine exceeding loveliness.
Xet a great Assembly be
Of the fearless and the free
On some spot of English ground
Where the plains stretch wide around.
'Let the blue sky overhead,
The green earth on which ye tread,
All that must eternal be
Witness the solemnity.
AN ANTHOLOGY OF ENGLISH POETRY 245
PERCY BYSSHE SHELLEY
Trom the corners uttermost
Of the bounds of English coast;
From every hut, village, and town
Where those who live and suffer moan,
Trom the workhouse and the prison
Where pale as corpses newly risen,
Women, children, young and old
Groan for pain, and weep for cold -
Trom the haunts of daily life
Where is waged the daily strife
With common wants and common cares
Which sows the human heart with tares -
"Lastly from the palaces
Where the murmur of distress
Echoes, like the distant sound
Of a wind alive around
Those prison halls of wealth and feshion,
Where some few feel such compassion
For those who groan, and toil, and wail
As must make their brethren pale -
Te who suffer woes untold,
Or to feel, or to behold
Your lost country bought and sold
With a price of blood and gold -
Let a vast assembly be,
And with great solemnity
Declare with measured words that ye
Are, as God has made ye, free -
'Be your strong and simple words
Keen to wound as sharpened swords,
And wide as targes let them be,
With their shade to cover ye.
246 DR. KOD6 KRISZTTNA
PERCY BYSSHE SHELLEY
Xet the tyrants pour around
With a quick and startling sound,
Like the loosening of a sea,
Troops of armed emblazonry.
Let the charged artillery drive
Till the dead air seems alive
With the clash of clanging wheels,
And the tramp of horses' heels.
'Let the fixed bayonet
Gleam widi sharp desire to wet
Its bright point in English blood
Looking keen as one for food.
Xet the horsemen's scimitars
Wheel and flash, like sphereless stars
Thirsting to eclipse their burning
In a sea of death and mourning.
'Stand ye calm and resolute.
Like a forest close and mute,
With folded arms and looks which are
Weapons of unvanquished war,
'And let Panic, who outspeeds
The career of armed steeds
Pass, a disregarded shade
Through your phalanx undismayed.
T^et the laws of your own land,
Good or ill, between ye stand
Hand to hand, and foot to foot,
Arbiters of the dispute,
The old laws of England - they
Whose reverend heads widi age are gray,
Children of a wiser day;
And whose solemn voice must be
Thine own echo - Liberty!
AN ANTHOLOGY OF ENGLISH POETRY 247
PERCY BYSSHE SHELLEY
'On those who first should violate
Such sacred heralds in their state
Rest the blood that must ensue,
And it will not rest on you.
'And if then the tyrants dare
Let them ride among you there,
Slash, and stab, and maim, and hew, -
What they like, that let them do.
With folded arms and steady eyes,
And little fear, and less surprise,
Look upon them as they slay
Till their rage has died away.
Then they will return with shame
To the place from which they came,
And the blood thus shed will speak
In hot blushes on their cheek.
'Every woman in the land
Will point at them as they stand -
They will hardly dare to greet
Their acquaintance in the street.
'And the bold, true warriors
Who have hugged Danger in wars
Will turn to those who would be free,
Ashamed of such base company.
'And that slaughter to the Nation
Shall steam up like inspiration,
Eloquent, oracular;
A volcano heard afar.
'And these words shall then become
Like Oppression's thundered doom
Ringing through each heart and brain,
Heard again - again - again -
248 DR. KOD6 KRISZTTNA
PERCY BYSSHE SHELLEY
'Rise like Lions after slumber
In unvanquishable number -
Shake your chains to earth like dew
Which in sleep had fallen on you -
Ye are many - they are few.'
(1819) 118201
The Cloud
I bring fresh showers for the thirsting flowers,
From the seas and the streams;
I bear light shade for the leaves when laid
In their noonday dreams.
From my wings are shaken the dews that waken
The sweet buds every one,
When rocked to rest on their mother's breast,
As she dances about the sun.
I wield me flail of the lashing hail,
And whiten the green plains under,
And then again I dissolve it in rain,
And laugh as I pass in thunder.
I sift the snow on the mountains below,
And their great pines groan aghast;
And all the night 'tis my pillow white,
While I sleep in the arms of the blast.
Sublime on the towers of my skiey bowers,
Lightning my pilot sits,
In a cavern under is fretted the thunder,
It struggles and howls at fits;
Over earth and ocean, with gentle motion,
This pilot is guiding me,
Lured by the love of the genii that move
In the depths of the purple sea;
Over the rills, and the crags, and the hills,
Over the lakes and the plains,
Wherever he dream, under mountain or stream
AN ANTHOLOGY OF ENGLISH POETRY 249
PERCY BYSSHE SHELLEY
The Spirit he loves remains;
And I all the while bask in heaven's blue smile,
Whilst he is dissolving in rains.
The sanguine sunrise, with his meteor eyes,
And his burning plumes outspread,
Leaps on the back of my sailing rack,
When the morning star shines dead,
As on the jag of a mountain crag,
Which an earthquake rocks and swings,
An eagle alit one moment may sit
In the light of its golden wings.
And when sunset may breathe from the lit sea beneath,
Its ardours of rest and of love,
And the crimson pall of eve may fall
From the depth of heaven above,
With wings folded I rest, on mine airy nest,
As still as a brooding dove.
That orbed maiden with white fire laden,
Whom mortals call the moon,
Glides glimmering o'er my fleece-like floor,
By the midnight breezes strewn;
And wherever the beat of her unseen feet,
Which only the angels hear,
May have broken the woof of my tent's thin roof,
The stars peep behind her and peer;
And I laugh to see them whirl and flee,
Like a swarm of golden bees,
When I widen the rent in my wind-built tent,
Till the calm rivers, lakes, and seas,
Like strips of the sky fallen through me on high,
Are each paved with the moon and these.
I bind the sun's throne with a burning zone,
And the moon's with a girdle of pearl;
The volcanoes are dim, and the stars reel and swim,
When the whirlwinds my banner unfurl.
250 DR. KOD6 KRISZTTNA
PERCY BYSSHE SHELLEY
From cape to cape, with a bridge-like shape,
Over a torrent sea,
Sunbeam-proof, I hang like a roof,
The mountains its columns be.
The triumphal arch through which I march
With hurricane, fire, and snow,
When the powers of the air are chained to my chair,
Is the million-coloured bow;
The sphere-fire above its soft colours wove,
While the moist earth was laughing below.
I am the daughter of earth and water,
And the nursling of the sky;
I pass through the pores of the ocean and shores;
I change, but I cannot die.
For after the rain when with never a stain,
The pavilion of heaven is bare,
And the winds and sunbeams with their convex gleams,
Build up the blue dome of air,
I silently laugh at my own cenotaph,
And out of the caverns of rain,
Like a child from the womb, like a ghost from the tomb,
I arise, and unbuild it again. -
(1820) (1820)
To a Sky-Lark
All to thee, blithe Spirit!
Bird thou never wert,
That from Heaven, or near it,
Pourest thy full heart
In profuse strains of unpremeditated art.
Higher still and higher
From the earth thou springest
Like a cloud of fire;
The blue deep thou wingest,
And singing still dost soar, and soaring ever singest.
AN ANTHOLOGY OF ENGLISH POETRY 251
PERCY BYSSHE SHELLEY
In the golden lightning
Of the sunken sun,
O'er which clouds are brightening,
Thou dost float and run;
Like an unbodied joy whose race is just begun.
The pale purple even
Melts around thy flight;
Like a star of Heaven,
In the broad daylight
Thou art unseen, but yet I hear thy shrill delight,
Keen as are the arrows
Of that silver sphere
Whose intense lamp narrows
In the white dawn clear
Until we hardly see - we feel, that it is there.
All the earth and air
With thy voice is loud,
As, when night is bare,
From one lonely cloud
The moon rains out her beams, and Heaven is overflowed.
What thou art we know not;
What is most like thee?
From rainbow clouds there flow not
Drops so bright to see
As from thy presence showers a rain of melody.
Like a poet hidden
In the light of thought,
Singing hymns unbidden,
Till the world is wrought
To sympathy with hopes and fears it heeded not:
252 DR. KOD6 KRISZTTNA
PERCY BYSSHE SHELLEY
Like a high-born maiden
In a palace tower,
Soothing her love-laden
Soul in secret hour
With music sweet as love, which overflows her bower:
Like a glow-worm golden
In a dell of dew,
Scattering unbeholden
Its aerial hue
Among the flowers and grass, which screen it from the view:
Like a rose embowered
In its own green leaves,
By warm winds deflowered,
Till the scent it gives
Makes faint with too much sweet these heavy-winged thieves.
Sound of vernal showers
On the twinkling grass,
Rain-awakened flowers,
All that ever was,
Joyous, and clear, and fresh, thy music doth surpass:
Teach us, Sprite or Bird,
What sweet thoughts are thine:
I have never heard
Praise of love or wine
That panted forth a flood of rapture so divine.
Chorus Hymeneal,
Or triumphal chant,
Matched with thine would be all
But an empty vaunt,
A thing wherein we feel there is some hidden want.
AN ANTHOLOGY OF ENGLISH POETRY 253
PERCY BYSSHE SHELLEY
What objects are the fountains
Of thy happy strain?
What fields, or waves, or mountains?
What shapes of sky or plain?
What love of thine own kind? what ignorance of pain?
With thy clear keen joyance,
Languor cannot be:
Shadow of annoyance
Never came near thee:
Thou lovest - but ne'er knew love's sad satiety.
Waking or asleep,
Thou of death must deem
Things more true and deep
Than we mortals dream,
Or how could thy notes flow in such a crystal stream?
We look before and after,
And pine for what is not:
Our sincerest laughter
With some pain is fraught;
Our sweetest songs are those that tell of saddest thought.
Yet, if we could scorn
Hate, and pride, and fear;
If we were things born
Not to shed a tear,
I know not how thy joy we ever should come near.
Better than all measures
Of delightful sound,
Better than all treasures
That in books are found,
Thy skill to poet were, thou scorner of the ground!
254 DR. KOD6 KRISZTTNA
PERCY BYSSHE SHELLEY
Teach me half the gladness
That thy brain must know,
Such harmonious madness
From my lips would flow
The world should listen then - as I am listening now.
(1810) (1820)
The Triumph of Life
(Excerpt 11. 358-388)
In her right hand she bore a chrystal glass
Mantling with bright Nepenthe; - the fierce splendour
Fell from her as she moved under the mass
Of the deep cavern, and with palms so tender
Their tread broke not the mirror of its billow,
Glided along the river, and did bend her
Head under the dark boughs, till like a willow
Her fair hair swept the bosom of the stream
That whispered with delight to be her pillow.
As one enamoured is upborne in dream
O'er lilly-paven lakes mid silver mist
To wondrous music, so this shape might seem
Partly to tread the waves with feet which kist
The dancing foam, partly to glide along
The airs that roughened the moist amethyst,
Or the slant morning beams that fell among
The trees, or the soft shadows of the trees;
And her feet ever to the ceaseless song
Of leaves and winds and waves and birds and bees
And falling drops moved in a measure new
Yet sweet, as on summer evening breeze
AN ANTHOLOGY OF ENGLISH POETRY 255
PERCY BYSSHE SHELLEY
Up from die lake a shape of golden dew
Between two rocks, adiwart the rising moon,
Dances i' the wind where eagle never flew. -
And still her feet, no less than the sweet tune
To which they moved, seemed as they moved, to blot
The thoughts of him who gazed on them, and soon
All that was seemed as if it had been not,
As if the gazer's mind was strewn beneath
H e r feet like embers, and she, thought by thought
Trampled its fires into the dust of death.
118221 (18241
256 DR. KOD6 KR1SZTINA
JOHN CLARE
(1793-1864)
John Clare was the nearest thing to the "natural poet" for whom
primitivists had been searching since the mid-eighteenth century. In his
time he was commonly known as "the Northamptonshire Peasant Poet"
He was the son of a farm labourer born at Helpston near Peterborough. He
obtained enough schooling to enable him to read and write. Clare had
bought a copy of James Thomson's (Scottish poet) Seasons out of his scanty
earnings and had begun to write poems. Clare eventually befriended the
author of Seasons and introduced his poems to John Taylor of the publishing
firm of Taylor & Hessey, which issued the Poems Descriptive qfRuralLife and
Scenery in 1820. This book was highly praised, and in the next year his
Village Minstrel and other Poems was published. He was greatly patronized,
but his celebrity soon dimmed, and his three later books were failures.
Under these and other disappointments his mind gave way in 1837, and he
spent almost all the rest of his life in an asylum. In the asylum he was
encouraged and helped to write. Here he wrote his most famous poem, I
Am, but many others besides. He died on the 20th of May 1864, in his 71st
year. His remains were returned to Helpston for burial in St Botolph's
churchyard.
IAm
I am: yet what I am none cares or knows,
My friends forsake me like a memory lost;
I am the self-consumer of my woes,
They rise and vanish in oblivious host,
Like shades in love and death's oblivion lost;
And yet I am! and live with shadows tost
Into the nothingness of scorn and noise,
Into the living sea of waking dreams,
Where there is neither sense of life nor joys,
But the vast shipwreck of my life's esteems;
And e'en the dearest - that I loved the best -
Are strange - nay, rather stranger than the rest
AN ANTHOLOGY OF ENGLISH POETRY 257
JOHN CLARE
I long for scenes where man has never trod;
A place where woman never smil'd or wept;
There to abide with my creator, God,
And sleep as I in childhood sweetly slept:
Untroubling and untroubled where I lie;
The grass below-above the vaulted sky.
(1842-46) (1848)
Oock-O-Chy
In the cowslip pips I lie,
Hidden from the buzzing fly,
While green grass beneath me lies,
Pearled with dew like fishes' eyes,
Here I lie, a dock-o'-day,
Waiting for the time o' day.
While the forest quakes surprise,
And the wild wind sobs and sighs,
My home rocks as like to fall,
On its pillar green and tall;
When the pattering rain drives by
Clock-o'-day keeps warm and dry.
Day by day and night by night,
All the week I hide from sight;
In the cowslip pips I lie,
In the rain still warm and dry;
Day and night and night and day,
Red, black-spotted dock-o'-day.
My home shakes in wind and showers,
Pale green pillar topped with flowers,
Bending at the wild wind's breath,
Till I touch the grass beneath;
Here I live, lone dock-o'-day,
Watching for the time of day.
(1873)
258 DR. KOD6 KRISZITNA
JOHN CLARE
A Vision
1
I lost the love of heaven above;
I spurn'd the lust of earth below;
I felt the sweets of fancied love, —
And hell itself my only foe.
I lost earth's joys but felt the glow
Of heaven's flame abound in me:
Till loveliness and I did grow
The bard of immortality.
I loved, but woman fell away;
I hid me from her faded fame:
I snatch'd the sun's eternal ray, —
And wrote till earth was but a name.
In every language upon earth,
On every shore, o'er every sea,
I gave my name immortal birth,
And kept my spirit with the free.
118441 119141
AN ANTHOLOGY OF ENGLISH POETRY 259
JOHN KEATS
(1795-1821)
Keats was born in London in 1795 as the son of a stable keeper. His
parents both died before he was fifteen. His guardian sent him as an
apprentice to a surgeon. Keats was quite skillful at his work, but he did not
like it, and seven years later he decided to give up medicine and become a
poet. In 1819 he published his first book of poems, which received cruel
reviews, but he kept on working undauntedly. Keats' short life was not a
happy one. His last three years, during which he wrote all his best-known
works, among them lyrics, ballads, romances and epic sequences, was
overshadowed by his oncoming illness. In the year 1818 Keats went on a
walking tour of the English Lake District, Scotland and Ireland from
which he returned with a chronically ulcerated throat. In the autumn of
the same year he fell in love with Fanny Brawne. They became engaged,
but Keats* dedication to his poetry, his poverty and his increasingly
growing illness made marriage impossible and love a torment. Between
January and September 1819 Keats achieved the culmination of his poetic
career when virtually masterpiece followed masterpiece. In the fall of 1820
Keats went to Italy in order to seek a milder climate. He reached Rome in
November 1820, and died there shortly after his arrival in February 1821.
He was buried in the Protestant Cemetery in Rome with the following
words engraved on his tomb: "Here lies one whose name was writ in
water".
On First Looking into Chapman's Homer
Much have I travelled in the realms of gold,
And many goodly states and kingdoms seen;
Round many western islands have I been
Which bards in fealty to Apollo hold.
Oft of one wide expanse had I been told
That deep-browed Homer ruled as his demesne;
Yet did I never breathe its pure serene
Till I heard Chapman speak out loud and bold:
Then felt I like some watcher of the skies
260 DR. KOD6 KRISZITNA
JOHN KEATS
When a new planet swims into his ken;
Or like stout Cortez when with eagle eyes
He startt at the Pacific - and all his men
Looked at each other with a wild surmise -
Silent, upon a peak in Darien.
(1816) (1816)
On Seeing the Elgin Marbles
My spirit is too weak; mortality
Weighs heavily on me like unwilling sleep,
And each imagined pinnacle and steep
Of godlike hardship tells me I must die
Like a sick eagle looking at the sky.
Yet 'tis a gentle luxury to weep,
That I have not the cloudy winds to keep
Fresh for the opening of the morning's eye.
Such dim-conceived glories of the brain
Bring round the heart an indescribable feud;
So do these wonders a most dizzy pain,
That mingles Grecian grandeur with the rude
Wasting of old Time -with a billowy main,
A sun, a shadow of a magnitude.
(1817) (1817)
La Belle Dame Sans Merd
Oh what can ail thee, knight-at-arms,
Alone and palely loitering?
The sedge has withered from the lake,
And no birds sing.
Oh what can ail thee, knight-at-arms,
So haggard and so woe-begone?
The squirrel's granary is full,
And the harvest's done.
AN ANTHOLOGY OF ENGLISH POETRY 261
JOHN KEATS
I see a lily on thy brow,
With anguish moist and fever-dew,
And on thy cheeks a fading rose
Fast withereth too.
I met a lady in the meads,
Full beautiful - a faery's child,
Her hair was long, her foot was light,
And her eyes were wild.
I made a garland for her head,
And bracelets too, and fragrant zone;
She looked at me as she did love,
And made sweet moan.
I set her on my pacing steed,
And nothing else saw all day long,
For sidelong would she bend, and sing
A faery's song.
She found me roots of relish sweet,
And honey wild, and manna-dew,
And sure in language strange she said -
1 love thee true'.
She took me to her elfin grot,
And there she wept and sighed full sore,
And there I shut her wild wild eyes
With kisses four.
And there she lulled me asleep
And there I dreamed - Ah! woe betide! -
The latest dream I ever dreamt
On the cold hill side.
I saw pale kings and princes too,
Pale warriors, death-pale were they all;
They cried - Xa Belle Dame sans Merci
Hath thee in thrall!'
262 DR. KOD6 KRISZTINA
JOHN KEATS
I saw their starved lips in the gloam,
With horrid warning gaped wide,
And I awoke and found me here,
On the cold hill's side.
And this is why I sojourn here
Alone and palely loitering,
Though the sedge is withered from the lake,
And no birds sing.
118191 (1820)
Ode to a Nightingale
My heart aches, and a drowsy numbness pains
My sense, as though of hemlock I had drunk,
Or emptied some dull opiate to the drains
One minute past, and Lethe-wards had sunk:
Tis not through envy of thy happy lot,
But being too happy in thine happiness, -
That thou, light-winged Dryad of the trees,
In some melodious plot
Of beechen green and shadows numberless,
Singest of summer in full-throated ease.
O, for a draught of vintage! that hath been
Cool'd a long age in the deep-delved earth,
Tasting of Flora and the country green,
Dance, and Provencal song, and sunburnt mirth!
O for a beaker full of the warm South,
Full of the true, the blushful Hippocrene,
With beaded bubbles winking at rhe brim,
And purple-stained mouth;
That I might drink, and leave the world unseen,
And with thee fade away into the forest dim:
AN ANTHOLOGY OF ENGLISH POETRY 263
JOHN KEATS
Fade far away, dissolve, and quite forget
What thou among the leaves hast never known,
The weariness, the fever, and the fret
Here, where men sit and hear each other groan;
Where palsy shakes a few, sad, last gray hairs,
Where youth grows pale, and spectre-thin, and dies;
Where but to think is to be full of sorrow
And leaden-eyed despairs,
Where Beauty cannot keep her lustrous eyes,
Or new Love pine at them beyond to-morrow.
Away! away! for I will fly to thee,
Not charioted by Bacchus and his pards,
But on the viewless wings of Poesy,
Though the dull brain perplexes and retards:
Already with thee! tender is the night,
And haply the Queen-Moon is on her throne,
Clustered around by all her starry Fays;
But here there is no light,
Save what from heaven is with the breezes blown
Through verdurous glooms and winding mossy ways.
I cannot see what flowers are at my feet,
Nor what soft incense hangs upon the boughs,
But, in embalmed darkness, guess each sweet
Wherewith the seasonable month endows
The grass, the thicket, and the fruit-tree wild;
White hawthorn, and the pastoral eglantine;
Fast fading violets covered up in leaves;
And mid-May's eldest child,
The coming musk-rose, full of dewy wine,
The murmurous haunt of flies on summer eves.
264 DR. KOD6 KRISZITNA
JOHN KEATS
Darkling I listen; and, for many a time
I have been half in love with easeful Death,
Call*d him soft names in many a mused rhyme,
To lake into the air my quiet breath;
Now more than ever seems it rich to die,
To cease upon the midnight with no pain,
While thou art pouring forth thy soul abroad
In such an ecstasy!
Still wouldst thou sing, and I have ears in vain -
To thy high requiem become a sod.
Thou wast not born for death, immortal Bird!
No hungry generations tread thee down;
The voice I hear this passing night was heard
In ancient days by emperor and clown:
Perhaps the self-same song that found a path
Through the sad heart of Ruth, when, sick for home,
She stood in tears amid the alien corn;
The same that oft-times hath
Charm'd magic casements, opening on the foam
Of perilous seas, in faery lands forlorn.
Forlorn! the very word is like a bell
To toll me back from thee to my sole self!
Adieu! the fancy cannot cheat so well
As she is fam'd to do, deceiving elf.
Adieu! adieu! thy plaintive anthem fades
Past the near meadows, over the still stream,
Up the hill-side; and now 'tis buried deep
In the next valley-glades:
Was it a vision, or a waking dream?
Fled is that music: - Do I wake or sleep?
(1819) (1820)
AN ANTHOLOGY OF ENGLISH POETRY 265
JOHN KEATS
Ode on a Grecian Urn
Thou still unravish'd bride of quietness,
Thou foster-child of silence and slow time,
Sylvan historian, who canst thou express
A flowery tale more sweetly than our rhyme:
What Ieaf-rring*d legend haunt about thy shape
Of deities or mortals, or of both,
In Tempe or the dales of Arcady?
What men or gods are these? What maidens loth?
What mad pursuit? What struggle to escape?
What pipes and timbrels? What wild ecstasy?
Heard melodies are sweet, but those unheard
Are sweeter: therefore, ye soft pipes, play on;
Not to the sensual ear, but, more endearM,
Pipe to the spirit ditties of no tone:
Fair youth, beneath die trees, thou canst not leave
Thy song, nor ever can those trees be bare;
Bold lover, never, never canst thou kiss,
Though winning near the goal - yet, do not grieve;
She cannot fade, mough thou hast not thy bliss,
For ever wilt thou love, and she be fair!
Ah, happy, happy boughs! that cannot shed
Your leaves, nor ever bid the spring adieu;
And, happy melodist, unwearied,
For ever piping songs for ever new;
More happy love! more happy, happy love!
For ever warm and still to be enjoyed,
For ever panting, and for ever young;
All breadiing human passion far above,
That leaves a heart high-sorrowful and cloyed,
A burning forehead, and a parching tongue.
266 DR. KOD6 KRISZITNA
JOHN KEATS
Who are these coming to the sacrifice?
To what green altar, O mysterious priest,
Lead'st thou that heifer lowing at the skies,
And all her silken flanks with garlands drestf
What little town by river or sea shore,
Or mountain-built with peaceful citadel,
Is emptied of this folk, this pious morn?
And, little town, thy streets for evermore
Will silent be; and not a soul to tell
Why thou art desolate, can e'er return.
O Attic shape! Fair attitude! with brede
Of marble men and maidens overwrought,
With forest branches and the trodden weed;
Thou, silent form, dost tease us out of thought
As doth eternity: Cold Pastoral!
When old age shall this generation waste,
Thou shalt remain, in midst of other woe
Than ours, a friend to man, to whom thou sayst,
"Beauty is truth, truth beauty," - that is all
Ye know on earth, and all ye need to know.
11819) 11820)
AN ANTHOLOGY OF ENGLISH POETRY 267
JOHN KEATS
Bright Star
Bright star! would I were steadfast as thou art -
Not in lone splendour hung aloft the night,
And watching, with eternal lids apart,
Like Nature's patient sleepless Eremite,
The moving waters at their priestlike task
Of pure ablution round earth's human shores,
Or gazing on the new soft fallen mask
Of snow upon the mountains and the moors -
No - yet still steadfast, still unchangeable,
PillowM upon my fair love's ripening breast,
To feel for ever its soft fall and swell,
Awake for ever in a sweet unrest,
Still, still to hear her tender-taken breath,
And so live ever - or else swoon to death.
118191 (1838)
When I Have Fears
When I have fears that I may cease to be
Before my pen has glean'd my teeming brain,
Before high-piled books, in charactery,
Hold like rich garners the full ripen'd grain;
When I behold, upon the night's starr'd face,
Huge cloudy symbols of a high romance,
And think that I may never live to trace
Their shadows, with the magic hand of chance;
And when I feel, fair creature of an hour,
That I shall never look upon thee more,
Never have relish in the faery power
Of unreflecting love; - then on the shore
Of the wide world I stand alone, and think
Till love and fame to nothingness do sink.
(18181 (18481
268 DR. KOD6 KRISZIINA
ELIZABETH BARRETT BROWNING
(1806-18611
She was born at Cohnadatia Hall near Durham, in 1806, the daughter of
a Creole plantation owner Edward Barrett Her mother was Alary
Graham-Clarke of a wealthy Newcastle family. She was educated at home
where she studied Latin and Greek, and read history, philosophy and
literature avidly. But as her intellectual and literary powers matured, her
personal life became increasingly circumscribed by both ill health and her
tyrannically protective father, who had forbidden any of his eleven children to
marry. She published her first poem, anonymously, at the age of fourteen. In
1826 she published, also anonymously, An Essay on Mind and Other Poems.
The publishing of The Cry of the Children in 1841 gave her career a great
impulse. By the age of thirty-nine she was a prominent woman of letters.
Robert Browning began courting her, which led to their secret marriage and
elopement She accompanied her husband to Italy, which became her home
almost continuously until her death. The Brownings settled in Florence, and
there she wrote Cam Gtridi Windom (1851) under the inspiration of the
Tuscan struggle for liberty. Aurora Leigh, the largest of her longer poems,
appeared inl856.Inl850 The Sonnets from the Portuguese - the history of her
own love-story, thinly disguised by its title - had appeared. In 1860 she issued
a collected edition of her poems under the title, Poems before Congress. She was
passionately admired by contemporaries for her moral and emotional ardour,
and her energetic engagement with the issues of her day.
From Sonnets from the Portuguese
22
When our two souls stand up erect and strong,
Face to face, silent, drawing nigh and nigher,
Until the lengthening wings break into fire
At either curved point, - what bitter wrong
Can the earth do to us, that we should not long
Be here contented? Think. In mounting higher,
The angels would press on us and aspire
To drop some golden orb of perfect song
Into our deep, dear silence. Let us stay
AN ANTHOLOGY OF ENGLISH POETRY 269
ELIZABETH BARRETT BROWNING
Rather on earth, Beloved, - where the unfit
Contrarious moods of men recoil away
And isolate pure spirits, and permit
A place to stand and love in for a day,
With darkness and the death-hour rounding it.
36
When we met first and loved, I did not build
Upon the event with marble. Could it mean
To last, a love set pendulous between
Sorrow and sorrow? Nay, I rather thrilled,
Distrusting every light that seemed to gild
The onward path, and feared to overlean
A finger even. And, though I have grown serene
And strong since then, I think that God has willed
A still renewable fear ... O love, O troth
Lest these enclasped hands should never hold,
This mutual kiss drop down between us both
As an unowned thing, once the lips being cold.
And Love, be false! if he, to keep one oath,
Must lose one joy, by his life's star foretold,
43
How do I love thee? Let me count the ways.
I love thee to the depth and breadth and height
My soul can reach, when feeling out of sight
For the ends of Being and ideal Grace.
I love thee to the level of everyday's
Most quiet need, by sun and candle-light.
I love thee freely, as men strive for Right;
I love thee purely, as they turn from Praise.
I love thee with the passion put to use
In my old griefs, and with my childhood's faith.
I love thee with a love I seemed to lose
With my lost saints! -1 love thee with the breath,
Smiles, tears, of all my life! — and, if God choose,
I shall but love thee better after death.
(1845-47) (1850)
270 DR. KOD6 KRISZITNA
ALFRED, LORD TENNYSON
(1809-1892)
Tennyson was born in the rectory of Somersby in Lincolnshire as the
fourth son in a family of twelve children. He was educated at Trinity
College, Cambridge, where he was acquainted with A. H. Hallam. In
1830 he published Poems, Chiefly Lyrical, which were cruelly and severely
criticised. In 1832, he travelled with Hallam on the Continent. Hallam's
sudden death, in 1833, seemed an overwhelming calamity to his friend.
Not only the long elegy In Memoriom but also many of Tennyson's other
poems are tributes to this early friendship. His early volumes of poetry
(1831 and 1832) were attacked as "obscure** or "afFected" by some of the
reviewers. Tennyson suffered acutely under hostile criticism, but also
profited from it. His volume published in 1842 demonstrated a
remarkable advance in taste and technical merit, and brought him fame
and recognition. In 1850 Tennyson was appointed Poet Laureate and in
the same year he married Emily Sellwood, whom he had loved for thirteen
years, but whom his poverty had prevented from marrying. He died in
1892 and was buried in Westminster Abbey. Queen Victoria was an
ardent admirer of Tennyson's work, and in 1884 created him Baron
Tennyson, of Blackdown in the County of Sussex and of Freshwater in the
Isle of Wight. He was the first English writer raised to the Peerage.
The Kraken47
Below the thunders of the upper deep,
Far far beneath in the abysmal sea,
His ancient, dreamless, uninvaded sleep
The Kraken sleepeth: faintest sunlights flee
About his shadowy sides: above him swell
Huge sponges of millennial growth and height;
And far away into the sickly light,
From many a wondrous grot and secret cell
Unnumbered and enormous polypi
Winnow with giant fins the slumbering green.
47 A mythical sea beast of gigantic size.
AN ANTHOLOGY OF ENGLISH POETRY 271
ALFRED, LORD TENNYSON
There hath he lain for ages and will lie
Battering upon huge seaworms in his sleep,
Until the latter fire shall heat the deep;
Then once by men and angels to be seen,
In roaring he shall rise and on the surface die.
(1830)
Lady of Shallot
Parti
On either side the river lie
Long fields of barley and of rye,
That clothe the wold and meet the sky;
And through the field the road runs by
To many-towered Camelot;
And up and down the people go,
Gazing where the lilies blow
Round an island there below,
The island of Shalott.
Willows whiten, aspens quiver,
Little breezes dusk and shiver
Through the wave that runs for ever
By the island in the river
Flowing down to Camelot.
Four grey walls, and four grey towers,
Overlook a space of flowers,
And the silent isle imbowers
The Lady of Shalott.
By the margin, willow-veiled,
Slide the heavy barges trailed
By slow horses; and unhailed
The shallop flitteth silken-sailed
Skimming down to Camelot:
But who hath seen her wave her hand?
272 DR. KOD6 KRISZITNA
ALFRED, LORD TENNYSON
Or at the casement seen her stand?
Or is she known in all the land,
TheLadyofShalott?
Only reapers, reaping early
In among the bearded barley,
Hear a song that echoes cheerly
From the river winding clearly,
Down to towered Camelot:
And by the moon the reaper weary,
Piling sheaves in uplands airy,
Listening, whispers "Tis the fairy
LadyofShalott."
PartH
There she weaves by night and day
A magic web with colours gay.
She has heard a whisper say,
A curse is on her if she stay
To look down to Camelot.
She knows not what the curse may be,
And so she weaveth steadily,
And little other care hath she,
The Lady of Shalott.
And moving through a mirror clear
That hangs before her all the year,
Shadows of the world appear.
There she sees the highway near
Winding down to Camelot:
There the river eddy whirls,
And there the surly village-churls,
And the red cloaks of market girls,
Pass onward from Shalott.
AN ANTHOLOGY OF ENGLISH POETRY 273
ALFRED, LORD TENNYSON
Sometimes a troop of damsels glad,
An abbot on an ambling pad,
Sometimes a curly shepherd-lad,
Or long-haired page in crimson clad,
Goes by to towered Camelot;
And sometimes through the mirror blue
The knights come riding two and two:
She hath no loyal knight and true,
The Lady of Shalott.
But in her web she still delights
To weave the mirror's magic sights,
For often through the silent nights
A funeral, with plumes and lights
And music, went to Camelot:
Or when the moon was overhead,
Came two young lovers lately wed;
"I am half sick of shadows," said
The Lady of Shalott.
Partm
A bow-shot from her bower-eaves,
He rode between the barley-sheaves,
The sun came dazzling through the leaves,
And flamed upon the brazen greaves
Of bold Sir Lancelot.
A red-cross knight for ever kneeled
To a lady in his shield,
That sparkled on the yellow field,
Beside remote Shalott.
The gemmy bridle glittered free,
Like to some branch of stars we see
Hung in the golden Galaxy.
The bridle bells rang merrily
As he rode down to Camelot:
And from his blazoned baldric slung
A mighty silver bugle hung,
274 DR. KOD6 KRISZITNA
ALFRED, LORD TENNYSON
And as he rode his armour rung,
Beside remote Shalott.
All in the blue unclouded weather
Thick-jewelled shone the saddle-leather,
The helmet and the helmet-feather
Burned like one burning flame together,
As he rode down to Camelot.
As often through the purple night,
Below the starry clusters bright,
Some bearded meteor, trailing light,
Moves over still Shalott.
His broad clear brow in sunlight glowed;
On burnished hooves his war-horse trode;
From underneath his helmet flowed
His coal-black curls as on he rode,
As he rode down to Camelot.
From the bank and from the river
He flashed into the crystal mirror,
"Tirra lirra," by the river
Sang Sir Lancelot.
She left the web, she left the loom,
She made three paces through the room,
She saw the water-lily bloom,
She saw the helmet and the plume,
She looked down to Camelot.
Out flew the web and floated wide;
The mirror cracked from side to side;
"The curse is come upon me," cried
The Lady of Shalott.
AN ANTHOLOGY OF ENGLISH POETRY 275
ALFRED, LORD TENNYSON
Part IV
In the stormy east-wind straining,
The pale yellow woods were waning,
The broad stream in his banks complaining,
Heavily the low sty raining
Over towered Camelot;
Down she came and found a boat
Beneath a willow left afloat,
And round about the prow she wrote
TheLadyofShalott.
And down the river's dim expanse,
Like some bold seer in a trance
Seeing all his own mischance,
With a glassy countenance
Did she look to Camelot.
And at the closing of the day
She loosed the chain, and down she lay;
The broad stream bore her far away,
TheLadyofShalott.
Lying, robed in snowy white
That loosely flew to left and right -
The leaves upon her felling light -
Through the noises of the night
She floated down to Camelot:
And as the boat-head wound along
The willowy hills and fields among,
They heard her singing her last song,
TheLadyofShalott.
Heard a carol, mournful, holy,
Chanted loudly, chanted lowly,
Till her blood was frozen slowly,
And her eyes were darkened wholly,
Turned to towered Camelot.
For ere she reached upon the tide
The first house by the water-side,
276 DR. KOD6 KRISZTTNA
ALFRED, LORD TENNYSON
Singing in her song she died,
The Lady of Shalott.
Under tower and balcony,
By garden-wall and gallery,
A gleaming shape she floated by,
Dead-pale between the houses high,
Silent into Camelot.
Out upon the wharfs they came,
Knight and burgher, lord and dame,
And round the prow they read her name,
The Lady of Shalott.
Who is this? and what is here?
And in the lighted palace near
Died the sound of royal cheer;
And they crossed themselves for fear,
All the knights at Camelot:
But Lancelot mused a little space;
He said, "She has a lovely face;
God in his mercy lend her grace,
The Lady of Shalott."
11831-321 11832, 1842)
Break, Break, Break
Break, break, break
On thy cold grey stones, O Sea!
And I would that my tongue could utter
The thoughts that arise in me.
O well for the fisherman's boy,
That he shouts with his sister at play!
O well for the sailor lad,
That he sings in his boat on the bay!
AN ANTHOLOGY OF ENGLISH POETRY 277
ALFRED, LORD TENNYSON
And the stately ships go on
To their haven under the hillBut O for the touch of a vanished hand,
And the sound of a voice that is still!
Break, break, break
At the foot of thy crags, O Sea!
But the tender grace of a day that is dead
Will never come back to me.
11834) (1842)
278 DR. KOD6 KRISZTINA
ROBERT BROWNING
(1812-18891
Browning was born in Camberwell in 1812. His father's mother was a
Creole and his mother's father a German who had settled in Scotland. He
was educated mainly by his father and private tutors. Until the time of his
marriage, at the age of thirty-four, he was rarely absent from his parents'
home. He married Elizabeth Barrett, the best-known literary woman of
England whose fame was for many years greater than Browning's. For
fifteen years they lived an ideally happy life in Pisa and Florence. In 1861
Elizabeth died, and Browning left with his son for England. The rest of his
life he lived in London and Venice. The majority of his works was
published in the last twenty-five years of his life. From these he received
recognition and came to be ranked with Tennyson. The characteristics of
bis poems were a strong psychological interest in the form of the dramatic
monologue, and a tendency to obscure or to deliberately use language that
is not straightforward.
My Last Duchesi?
That's my last Duchess painted on the wall,
Looking as if she were alive. I call
That piece a wonder, now: Fr Pandolf s hands
Worked busily a day, and there she stands.
WilFt please you sit and look at her? I said
Tr Pandolf by design, for never read
Strangers like you that pictured countenance,
The depth and passion of its earnest glance,
But to myself they turned (since none puts by
The curtain I have drawn for you, but I)
And seemed as they would ask me, if they durst,
48 The poem is based on incidents in the life of Alfonso II, Duke of Ferrara in Italy, whose first
wife, Lucrezia, a young woman died in 1561 after three years of marriage. Following her death,
the Duke negotiated through an agent to marry a niece of the count of Tyrol. Browning
represents the Duke as addressing this agent.
AN ANTHOLOGY OF ENGLISH POETRY 279
280 DR. KOD6 KRISZTINA
ROBERT BROWNING
Is ample warrant that no just pretence
Of mine for dowry will be disallowed;
Though his fair daughter's self, as I avowed
At starting, is my object. Nay, we'll go
Together down, sir. Notice Neptune, though,
Taming a sea-horse, thought a rarity,
Which Claus of Innsbruck cast in bronze for me!
(18421
Meeting At Night
The grey sea and the long black land;
And the yellow half-moon large and low;
And the startled little waves that leap
In fiery ringlets from their sleep,
As I gain the cove with pushing prow,
And quench its speed i' the slushy sand.
n.
Then a mile of warm sea-scented beach;
Three fields to cross till a farm appears;
A tap at the pane, the quick sharp scratch
And blue spurt of a lighted match,
And a voice less loud, thro' its joys and fears,
Than the two hearts beating each to each!
11845)
Parting At Morning
Round the cape of a sudden came the sea,
And the sun looked over the mountain's rim:
And straight was a path of gold for him,
And the need of a world of men for me.
(184S1
AN ANTHOLOGY OF ENGLISH POETRY 281
ROBERT BROWNING
Love in a Life
I.
Room after room,
I hunt the house through
We inhabit together.
Heart, fear nothing, for, heart, thou shatt find her -
Next time, herself! - not the trouble behind her
Left in the curtain, the couch's perfume!
As she brushed it, the cornice-wreath blossomed anew:
Yon looking-glass gleaned at the wave of her feather.
n.
Yet the day wears,
And door succeeds door;
I try the fresh fortune -
Range the wide house from the wing to the centre.
Still the same chance! She goes out as I enter.
Spend my whole day in the quest, - who cares?
But 'tis twilight, you see, - with such suites to explore,
Such closets to search, such alcoves to importune!
I18SB1
282 DR. KOD6 KR1SZTINA
EMILYBRONTE
(1818-1848)
Emily Bronte was born at Thornton in Yorkshire to Patrick Bronte and
Maria Branwell. She was the younger sister of Charlotte Bronte and the
fifth of six children. In 1820, the family moved to Haworth, West
Yorkshire, where Emily's father was perpetual curate, and it was in these
surroundings the sisters' literary talent flourished. In childhood, after the
death of their mother, the three sisters and their brother Branwell created
imaginary lands (Angria, Gondal, Gaaldine), which featured in stories
they wrote. Mr. Bronte educated his children himself and discussed
poetry, history and politcs with them as well. In 1838, Emily commenced
work as a governess at Miss Patchetfs Ladies Academy at Law Hill Hall,
near Halifax. Later, with her sister Charlotte, she attended a private school
in Brussels. It was the discovery of Emily's poetic talent by her family that
led her and her sisters, Charlotte and Anne, to publish a joint collection of
their poetry in 1846. To evade contemporary prejudice against female
writers, all three used male pseudonyms, Emily's being "Ellis Bell". She
subsequently published her only novel, Wuihering He%fhtsy in 1847. She
died on December 19, 1848 of tuberculosis, and was interred in family
vault at the Church of St. Michael and All Angels, Haworth. Her poems
share a drive to break through the constrictions of ordinary life, either by
the transfigurative power of the imagination, by union with another, or by
death itself. Her concern with a visionary world links her to the Romantic
poets, but her hymnlike stanzas have a haunting quality that distinguishes
her individual voice.
Spellbound
The night is darkening round me,
The wild winds coldly blow;
But a tyrant spell has bound me
And I cannot, cannot go.
AN ANTHOLOGY OF ENGLISH POETRY 283
EMILY BRONTE
The giant trees are bending
Their bare boughs weighed with snow.
And the storm is fast descending,
And yet I cannot go.
Clouds beyond clouds above me,
Wastes beyond wastes below;
But nothing drear can move me;
I will not, cannot go.
(1846)
The Night-Wind
In summer's mellow midnight,
A cloudless moon shone through
Our open parlour window,
And rose-trees wet with dew.
I sat in silent musing;
The soft wind waved my hair;
It told me heaven was glorious,
And sleeping earth was fair.
I needed not its breathing
To bring such thoughts to me;
But still it whispered lowly,
How dark the woods will be!
"The thick leaves in my murmur
Are rustling like a dream,
And all their myriad voices
Instinct with spirit seem."
I said, "Go, gentle singer,
Thy wooing voice is kind:
But do not think its music
Has power to reach my mind.
284 DR. KOD6 KRISZTTNA
EMILY BRONTE
"Play with the scented flower,
The young tree's supple bough,
And leave my human feelings
In their own course to flow."
The wanderer would not heed me;
Its kiss grew warmer still.
"O come!" it sighed so sweetly;
Til win thee 'gainst thy will.
"Were we not friends from childhood?
Have I not loved thee long?
As long as thou, the solemn night,
Whose silence wakes my song.
"And when thy heart is resting
Beneath the church-aisle stone,
I shall have time for mourning,
And Thou for being alone."
(1840) (1850)
No Coward Soul Is Mine
No coward soul is mine,
No trembler in the world's storm-troubled sphere:
I see Heaven's glories shine,
And faith shines equal, arming me from fear.
O God within my breast,
Almighty, ever-present Deity!
Life - that in me has rest,
As I - undying Life - have power in thee!
Vain are the thousand creeds
That move men's hearts: unutterably vain;
Worthless as withered weeds,
Or idlest froth amid the boundless main,
AN ANTHOLOGY OF ENGLISH POETRY 285
EMILY BRONTE
To waken doubt in one
Holding so fast by thine infinity;
So surely anchored on
The stedfast rock of immortality.
With wide-embracing love
Thy spirit animates eternal years,
Pervades and broods above,
Changes, sustains, dissolves, creates, and rears.
Though earth and man were gone,
And suns and universes ceased to be,
And Thou were left alone,
Every existence would exist in Thee.
There is not room for Death,
Nor atom that his might could render void:
Since thou art Being and Breath,
And what thou art may never be destroyed
(1850)
286 DR. KOD6 KRISZITNA
CHRISTINA ROSSETTI
(1830-1894)
Christina Georgina Rossetti was the sister of artist Dante Gabriel
Rossetti, as well as of William Michael Rossetti and Maria Francesca
Rossetti. Their father, Gabriele Rossetti, was an Italian poet and a political
asylum seeker from Naples, and their mother, Frances Polidori, was the
sister of Lord Byron's friend and physician, John William Polidori. In the
1840's her family was stricken with severe financial difficulties due to the
deterioriation of her father's physical and mental health, and when she was
14, Rossetti herself suffered a nervous breakdown. At this point, she, her
mother and her sister became intensely involved with the Anglo-Catholic
movement within the Church of England. For the rest of her life, Rossetti
governed herself by strict religious principles. She cancelled plans for
marriage on two occasions due to religious scruples. She lived a quiet life,
occupying herself with charitable work, with her family and with writing
poetry. Her poetry did not gain notice until the publication of Goblin
Market and Other Poems in 1862. Some readers have noted its likeness to
Coleridge's Ancient Mariner given both poems' religious themes of
temptation and sin, and of redemption by vicarious suffering. She was
ambivalent about women's suffrage, but many scholars have identified
feminist themes in her poetry. In 1893 Rossetti contracted cancer and died
the following year, in 1894.
A Birthday
My heart is like a singing bird
Whose nest is in a watered shoot;
My heart is like an apple-tree
Whose boughs are bent with thick-set fruit;
My heart is like a rainbow shell
That paddles in a halcyon sea;
My heart is gladder than all these
Because my love is come to me.
AN ANTHOLOGY OF ENGLISH POETRY 287
CHRISTINA ROSSETTI
Raise me a dais of silk and down;
Hang it with vair and purple dyes;
Carve it in doves, and pomegranates,
And peacocks with a hundred eyes;
Work it in gold and silver grapes,
In leaves, and silver fleurs-de-lys;
Because the birthday of my life
Is come, my love is come to me.
(1862)
Sweet Death
The sweetest blossoms die.
And so it was that, going day by day
Unto the Church to praise and pray,
And crossing the green churchyard thoughtfully,
I saw how on the graves the flowers
Shed their fresh leaves in showers,
And how their perfume rose up to the sky
Before it passed away.
The youngest blossoms die.
They die and fall and nourish the rich earth
From which they lately had their birth;
Sweet life, but sweeter death that passeth by
And is as though it had not been: -
All colours turn to green;
The bright hues vanish and the odours fly,
The grass hath lasting worth.
And youth and beauty die.
So be it, O my God, Thou God of truth:
Better than beauty and than youth
Are Saints and Angels, a glad company;
And Thou, O Lord, our Rest and Ease,
Art better far than these.
Why should we shrink from our full harvest! why
Prefer to glean with Ruth!
11862)
288 DR. KOD6 KR1SZTINA
CHRISTINA ROSSETTI
When lam Dead, My Dearest
When I am dead, my dearest,
Sing no sad songs for me;
Plant thou no roses at my head,
Nor shady cypress tree:
Be the green grass above me
With showers and dewdrops wet;
And if thou wilt, remember,
And if thou wilt, forget.
I shall not see the shadows,
I shall not feel the rain;
I shall not hear the nightingale
Sing on, as if in pain:
And dreaming through the twilight
That doth not rise nor set,
Haply I may remember,
And haply may forget.
(1862)
AN ANTHOLOGY OF ENGLISH POETRY 289
QERARD MANLEY HOPKINS
(1844-1889)
Hopkins was born near London into a large and cultivated family in
comfortable circumstances. After an outstanding career at Highgate
School, he entered Oxford in 1863, where he was exposed to a variety of
Victorian ways of thinking, both secular and religious. He was attracted to
the High Church movement represented by Edward Pusey, and then to
Roman Catholicism, Hopkins became a Roman Catholic in 1866, and
then entered the Jesuit noviciate in 1868. His decision to become a priest
and, in particular, a Jesuit priest, heightened his alienation, for in the eyes
of many Victorian Protestants, the Jesuit order was regarded with distrust.
In 1884 he was appointed to the chair of Greek at Dublin University. He
was a poet of intense originality and a skilful innovator of rhythm. His
poems, none of which was published in his lifetime, were collected by
Robert Bridges, who published a small selection in Poets and Poetry of the
Century. From the beginning of the 20* century he was increasingly
recognised as a major writer. His impact was seen as giving a renewal of
energy, seriousness and originality to poetry.
The Starlight Night
Look at the stars! look, look up at the skies!
O look at all the fire-folk sitting in the air!
The bright boroughs, the circle-citadels there!
Down in dim woods the diamond delves! the elves'-eyes!
The grey lawns cold where gold, where quickgold lies!
Wind-beat whitebeam! airy abeles set on a flare!
Flake-doves sent floating forth at a farmyard scare! -
Ah well! it is all a purchase, all is a prize.
Buy then! bid then! - What? - Prayer, patience, alms, vows.
Look, look: a May-mess, like on orchard boughs!
Look! March-bloom, like on mealed-with-yellow sallows!
These are indeed the barn; withindoors house
The shocks. This piece-bright paling shuts the spouse
Christ home, Christ and his mother and all his hallows.
(1918)
290 DR. KOD6 KRISZTTNA
GERARD MANLEY HOPKINS
The Windhover
To Christ our Lord
I caught this morning morning's minion, kingdom
of daylight's dauphin, dapple-dawn-drawn Falcon, in his riding
Of the rolling level underneath him steady air, and striding
High there, how he rung upon the rein of a wimpling wing,
In his ecstasy! then off, off forth on swing,
As a skate's heel sweeps smooth on a bow-bend: the hurl and gliding
Rebuffed the big wind. My heart in hiding
Stirred for a bird, - the achieve of, the mastery of the thing!
Brute beauty and valour and act, oh, air, pride, plume, here
Buckle! And the fire that breaks from thee then, a billion
Times told lovelier, more dangerous, O, my chevalier!
No wonder of it: sheer plod makes plough down sillion
Shine, and blue-beak embers, ah my dear,
Fall, gall themselves, and gash gold-vermillion.
(1918)
The Sea and the Skylark
On ear and ear two noises too old to end
Trench - right, the tide that ramps against the shore;
With a flood or a fell, low lull-off or all roar,
Frequenting there while moon shall wear and wend.
Left hand, off land, I hear the lark ascend,
His rash-fresh re-winded new-skeined score
In crisps of curl off wild winch whirl, and pour
And pelt music, till none's to spill nor spend.
How these two shame this shallow and frail town!
How ring right out our sordid turbid time,
Being pure! We, life's pride and cared-for crown,
AN ANTHOLOGY OF ENGLISH POETRY 291
GERARD MANLEY HOPKINS
Have lost that cheer and charm of earth's past prime:
Our make and making break, are breaking, down
To man's last dust, drain fast towards man's first slime.
119181
292 DR. KOD6 KRISZIINA
THOMAS HARDY
(1840-1928)
Thomas Hardy was a novelist, short story writer, and poet of the
naturalist movement, who delineated characters struggling against their
passions and circumstances. He was born at Higher Bockhampton near
Dorchester in Dorset. His father was a stonemason. His mother was
ambitious and well-read and supplemented his formal education. Hardy
trained as an architect in Dorchester before moving to London. While he
was completing his general education he was becoming more and more
interested both in fiction and poetry. He decided to concentrate on fiction
and his first real success was launched with Under the Greenwood Tree
(1872). In 1898 Hardy published his first volume of poetry, Wessex Poems,
a collection of poems written over 30 years. Hardy claimed poetry was his
first love, and published collections until his death in 1928. Hardy was a
confirmed atheist. Some attributed the bleak outlook of many of his novels
as reflecting his view of the absence of God, but his sense of the waste and
frustration involved in human life, his insistent irony when faced with
moral or metaphysical questions is part of the late Victorian mood. His
poetry was not as well received by his contemporaries as his novels had
been. The poems deal with themes of disappointment in love and life, and
mankind's long struggle against indifference to human suffering. A vein of
regret tinges his often seemingly banal themes. His poems range in style
from the epic closet drama Dynasts to smaller poems which are often
hopeful or even cheerful.
I Look Into My Glass
I look into my glass,
And view my wasting skin,
And say, "Would God it came to pass
My heart had shrunk as thin!"
For then, I, undistrest
By hearts grown cold to me,
Could lonely wait my endless rest
With equanimity.
AN ANTHOLOGY OF ENGLISH POETRY 293
THOMAS HARDY
But Time, to make me grieve,
Part steals, lets part abide;
And shakes this fragile frame at eve
With throbbings of noontide.
(1898)
Neutral Tones
We stood by a pond that winter day,
And the sun was white, as though chidden of God,
And a few leaves lay on the starving sod;
- They had fallen from an ash, and were gray.
Your eyes on me were as eyes that rove
Over tedious riddles of years ago;
And some words played between us to and fro
On which lost the more by our love.
The smile on your mouth was the deadest thing
Alive enough to have strength to die;
And a grin of bitterness swept thereby
Like an ominous bird a-wing,...
Since then, keen lessons that love deceives,
And wrings with wrong, have shaped to me
Your face, and the God-curst sun, and a tree,
And a pond edged with grayish leaves.
(1867) (1898)
294 DR. KOD6 KRISZTTNA
THOMAS HARDY
The Darkling Thrush
I leant upon a coppice gate
When Frost was spectre-gray,
And Writer's dregs made desolate
The weakening eye of day
The tangled bine-stems scored the sky
Like strings of broken lyres,
And all mankind that haunted nigh
Had sought their household fires.
The land's sharp features seemed to be
The Century's corpse outleant,
His crypt the cloudy canopy,
The wind his death-lament.
The ancient pulse of germ and birth
Was shrunken hard and dry,
And every spirit upon earth
Seemed fervourless as I.
At once a voice arose among
The bleak twigs overhead
In a full-hearted evensong
Of joy illimited;
An aged thrush, frail, gaunt, and small,
In blast-berufrled plume,
Had chosen thus to fling his soul
Upon the growing gloom.
So little cause for carolings
Of such ecstatic sound
Was written on terrestrial things
Afar or nigh around,
That I could think there trembled through
His happy good-night air
Some blessed Hope, whereof he knew
And I was unaware.
(Dec. 31,1900) (1902)
AN ANTHOLOGY OF ENGLISH POETRY 295
ALFRED EDWARD HOUSMAN
(1859-1936)
A. E. Housman was born in Fockbury, Worcestershire. He was educated
first in King Edward's School, then in Bromsgrove School where he won
prizes for his poetry. In 1877 he won a scholarship to St John's College,
Oxford, where he studied classics. In 1881, however, he failed his final
examinations and pursued classical studies independently and published
scholarly articles on authors such as Horace, Propertius, Ovid, Aeschylus,
Euripides and Sophocles. He gradually built up a high reputation due to
which he was offered the professorship of Latin at University College
London in 1892, which he accepted. In 1911 he took the Kennedy
Professorship of Latin at Trinity College, Cambridge, where he remained for
the rest of his life. During his lifetime only two volumes of his poetry
appeared in ^nac A Shropshire had (1922) and Last Poems (1922). After hi
death his brother Laurence Housman had another two volumes published,
More Poems (1936) and Complete Poems (1939). In these poems, Housman
appears more open and candid about his homosexuality and atheism than in
his lifetime. Housman always found his true vocation in classical studies and
treated poetry as a secondary activity. In 1933 he gave a lecture, The Name
and Nature of Poetry, in which he argued that poetry should appeal to the
emotions rather than the intellect. He died in Cambridge in 1936. His ashes
are buried near St Laurence's Church, Ludlow, in Shropshire. The
melancholic and wryly ironic tone pervades throughout his poetry, which was
mainly influenced by Greek and Latin poetry, the traditional ballad and the
lyrics of the German poet Heinrich Heine.
Epitaph On An Army ofMercenaries
These, in the day when heaven was falling,
The hour when earth's foundations fled,
Followed their mercenary calling
And took their wages and are dead.
296 DR. KOD6 KRISZTINA
ALFRED EDWARD HOUSMAN
Their shoulders held the sky suspended;
They stood, and earth's foundations stay;
What God abandoned, these defended,
And saved the sum of things for pay.
(19221
The Day of Battle
"Far I hear the bugle blow
To call me where I would not go,
And the guns begin the song,
'Soldier, fly or stay for long.'
Comrade, if to turn and fly
Made a soldier never die,
Fly I would, for who would not?
Tis sure no pleasure to be shot.
But since the man that runs away
Lives to die another day,
And cowards' funerals, when they come,
Are not wept so well at home,
Therefore, though the best is bad,
Stand and do the best, my lad;
Stand and fight and see your slain,
And rake the bullet in your brain."
(19221
The Street Sounds to the Soldiers' Tread
The street sounds to the soldiers' tread,
And out we troop to see:
A single redcoat turns his head,
He turns and looks at me.
AN ANTHOLOGY OF ENGLISH POETRY 297
ALFRED EDWARD HOUSMAN
My man, from sky to sky's so far,
We never crossed before;
Such leagues apart the world's ends are,
We're like to meet no more;
What thoughts at heart have you and I
We cannot stop to tell;
But dead or living, drunk or dry,
Soldier, I wish you well.
(1921)
298 DR. KOD6 KRISZITNA
WILLIAM BUTLER YEATS
(1865-19391
Yeats was born in Dublin. His father's family, of English stock, had
been in Ireland for at least two hundred years; his mother's family,
originally from Devon, had been for some generations at Sligo, in the west
of Ireland. He studied art, but soon gave it up in order to concentrate on
poetry. He developed an interest in mystic religion and the supernatural.
Being a nationalist, Yeats applied himself to creating an Irish national
theatre with the help of Lady Gregory (an Irish woman, who influenced
Yeats to become involved in Irish nationalism) and others. In 1898 Yeats,
Edward Martyn, George Moore and Lady Gregory founded the Irish
Literary Theatre. The following year they staged their first performance
with Yeats' The Countess Cathleen. In 1904 a wealthy English Quaker
bought the Mechanics' Institute in Dublin, which was converted into the
Abbey Theatre. With each succeeding collection of poems Yeats moved
further from the elaborate Pre-Raphaelite style of the 1890s. Many of
Yeats' poems in his second period reflect his desperate love of Maud
Gonne, a beautiful actress and violent Irish nationalist. In his poems and
plays written after 1916 he achieved a spare, colloquial lyricism wholly
unlike his earlier manner. He served as a senator of the Irish Free State
from 1922 to 1928. He was awarded the Nobel Prize for Literature in
1923. Yeats also published collections of essays and edited many books,
the most important being The OxfbrdBook of Modem Verse (1936). When
he died in January 1939, he left a large body of verse behind.
The Lake Isle oflnnis&ee
I will arise and go now, and go to Innisfree,
And a small cabin build there, of clay and wattles made:
Nine bean-rows will I have there, a hive for the honey-bee,
And live alone in the bee-loud glade.
And I shall have some peace there, for peace comes dropping slow,
Dropping from the veils of the mourning to where the cricket sings;
There midnight's all a glimmer, and noon a purple glow,
And evening full of the linnet's wings.
AN ANTHOLOGY OF ENGLISH POETRY 299
WILLIAM BUTLER YEATS
I will arise and go now, for always night and day
I hear lake water lapping with low sounds by the shore;
While I stand on the roadway, or on the pavements grey,
I hear it in the deep heart's core.
(1892)
The Second Coming
Turning and turning in the widening gyre
The falcon cannot hear the falconer;
Things fall apart; the centre cannot hold;
Mere anarchy is loosed upon the world,
The blood-dimmed tide is loosed, and everywhere
The ceremony of innocence is drowned;
The best lack all conviction, while the worst
Are full of passionate intensity.
Surely some revelation is at hand;
Surely the Second Coming is at hand.
The Second Coming! Hardly are those words out
When a vast image out of Spiritus Mundi
Troubles my sight: somewhere in sands of the desert
A shape with lion body and the head of a man,
A gaze blank and pitiless as the sun,
Is moving its slow thighs, while all about it
Reel shadows of the indignant desert birds.
The darkness drops again; but now I know
That twenty centuries of stony sleep
Were vexed to nightmare by a rocking cradle,
And what rough beast, its hour come round at last,
Slouches towards Bethlehem to be born?
(1919) (1920, 1921)
300 DR. KOD6 KRISZITNA
WILLIAM BUTLER YEATS
Leek and the Swan
A sudden blow: the great wings beating still
Above the staggering girl, her thighs caressed
By his dark webs, her nape caught in his bill,
He holds her helpless breast upon his breast.
How can those terrified vague fingers push
The feathered glory from her loosening thighs?
How can anybody, laid in that white rush,
But feel the strange heart beating where it lies?
A shudder in the loins, engenders there
The broken wall, the burning roof and tower
And Agamemnon dead.
Being so caught up,
So mastered by the brute blood of the air,
Did she put on his knowledge with his power
Before the indifferent beak could let her drop?
(1923) (1924, 1928)
Sailing to Byzantium
That is no country for old men. The young
In one another's arms, birds in the trees
- Those dying generations - at their song,
The salmon-falls, the mackerel-crowded seas,
Fish, flesh, or fowl, commend all summer long
Whatever is begotten, born, and dies.
Caught in that sensual music all neglect
Monuments of unageing intellect.
An aged man is but a paltry thing,
A tattered coat upon a stick, unless
Soul clap its hands and sing, and louder sing
For every tatter in its mortal dress,
AN ANTHOLOGY OF ENGLISH POETRY 301
WILLIAM BUTLER YEATS
Nor is there singing school but studying
Monuments of its own magnificence;
And therefore I have sailed the seas and come
To the holy city of Byzantium.
O sages standing in God's holy fire
As in the gold mosaic of a wall,
Come from the holy fire, perne in a gyre,
And be the singing-masters of my soul.
Consume my heart away; sick with desire
And fastened to a dying animal
It knows not what it is; and gather me
Into the artifice of eternity.
Once out of nature I shall never take
My bodily form from any natural thing,
But such a form as Grecian goldsmiths make
Of hammered gold and gold enamelling
To keep a drowsy Emperor awake;
Or set upon a golden bough to sing
To lords and ladies of Byzantium
Of what is past, or passing, or to come.
(1926) (1927)
Among School Children
I
I walk through the long schoolroom questioning;
A kind old nun in a white hood replies;
The children learn to cipher and to sing,
To study reading-books and histories,
To cut and sew, be neat in everything
In the best modern way - the children's eyes
In momentary wonder stare upon
A sixty-year-old smiling public man.
302 DR. KOD6 KRISZITNA
WILLIAM BUTLER YEATS
n
I dream of a Lcdaean body, bent
Above a sinking fire, a tale that she
Told of a harsh reproof, or trivial event
That changed some childish day to tragedy -
Told, and it seemed that our two natures blent
Into a sphere from youthful sympathy,
Or else, to alter Plato's parable,
Into the yolk and white of the one shell.
m
And thinking of that fit of grief or rage
I look upon one child or t'other there
And wonder if she stood so at that age -
For even daughters of the swan can share
Something of every paddler's heritage -
And had that colour upon cheek or hair,
And thereupon my heart is driven wild:
She stands before me as a living child.
IV
Her present image floats into the mind -
Did Quattrocento finger fashion it
Hollow of cheek as though it drank the wind
And took a mess of shadows for its meat?
And I though never of Ledaean kind
Had pretty plumage once - enough of that,
Better to smile on all that smile, and show
There is a comfortable kind of old scarecrow.
V
What youthful mother, a shape upon her lap
Honey of generation had betrayed,
And that must sleep, shriek, struggle to escape
As recollection or the drug decide,
Would think her Son, did she but see that shape
With sixty or more winters on its head,
A compensation for the pang of his birth,
Or the uncertainty of his setting forth?
AN ANTHOLOGY OF ENGLISH POETRY 303
WILLIAM BUTLER YEATS
VI
Plato thought nature but a spume that plays
Upon a ghostly paradigm of things;
Soldier Aristotle played the taws
Upon the bottom of a king of kings;
World-famous golden-thighed Pythagoras
Fingered upon a fiddle-stick or strings
What a star sang and careless Muses heard:
Old clothes upon old sticks to scare a bird.
vn
Both nuns and mothers worship images,
But those the candles light are not as those
That animate a mother's reveries,
But keep a marble or a bronze repose.
And yet they too break hearts - O presences
That passion, piety or afFection knows,
And that all heavenly glory symbolise -
O self-born mockers of man's enterprise;
vm
Labour is blossoming or dancing where
The body is not bruised to pleasure soul.
N o r beauty born out of its own despair,
N o r blear-eyed wisdom out of midnight oil.
O chestnut-tree, great-rooted blossomer,
Are you the leaf, the blossom or the bole?
O body swayed to music, O brightening glance,
H o w can we know the dancer from the dance?
119261 (1927)
304 DR. KOD6 KRISZIINA
WILLIAM BUTLER YEATS
Byzantium
The unpurged images of day recede;
The Emperor's drunken soldiery are abed;
Night resonance recedes, night walkers' song
After great cathedral gong;
A starlit or a moonlit dome disdains
All that man is,
All mere complexities,
The fury and the mire of human veins.
Before me floats an image, man or shade,
Shade more than man, more image than a shade;
For Hades' bobbin bound in mummy-cloth
May unwind the winding path;
A mouth that has no moisture and no breath
Breathless mouths may summon;
I hail the superhuman;
I call it death-in-life and life-in-death.
Miracle, bird or golden handiwork,
More miracle than bird or handiwork,
Planted on the star-lit golden bough,
Can like the cocks of Hades crow,
Or, by the moon embittered, scorn aloud
In glory of changeless metal
Common bird or petal
And all complexities of mire or blood.
At midnight on the Emperor's pavement flit
Flames that no faggot feeds, nor steel has lit,
Nor storm disturbs, flames begotten of flame.
Where blood-begotten spirits come
And all complexities of fury leave,
Dying into a dance,
An agony of trance,
An agony of flame that cannot singe a sleeve.
AN ANTHOLOGY OF ENGLISH POETRY 305
WILLIAM BLTLER YEATS
Astraddle on the dolphin's mire and blood,
Spirit after Spirit! The smithies break the flood.
The golden smithies of the Emperor!
Marbles of the dancing floor
Break bitter furies of complexity,
Those images that yet
Fresh images beget,
That dolphin-torn, that gong-tormented sea.
(19301 11932)
306 DR. KOD6 KRISZITNA
EDWARD THOMAS
(1878-19171
Thomas was born in London to Welsh parents. He was educated in
London and then in 1898 he received a history scholarship to Lincoln
College, Oxford. He produced over thirty books between 1897 and 1917,
and also edited sixteen anthologies and editions. Overwork and the
constant anxiety over his meager income finally led to a severe depression
and his breakdown in 1911. During his time spent working as a literary
critic he had also reviewed poetry, but never made a serious attempt to
write poems himself. In 1913 he met Robert Frost (American poet), who
encouraged him to write poems. From the autumn of 1914 he gradually
found that poems began to pour out of him. His poetic output surged
within a space of two years. He enlisted in 1915 attracted by a salary that
would help to support his growing family. While on duty at an
observation post on 9th
 April 1917 he was killed by the blast of a shell. His
Collected Poems was published in 1920 after his death. Thomas' poetry
differs from that of other famous Var poets' such as Wilfred Owen in the
mere fact that he did not concentrate direcdy on the experience of war in
his poetry. The love of the English countryside, which pervades much of
his work in prose, is expressed with great lyrical beauty and subtlety in his
poems.
February Afternoon
Men heard this roar of parleying starlings, saw,
A thousand years ago even as now,
Black rooks with white gulls following the plough
So that the first are last until a caw
Commands that last are first again, - a law
Which was of old when one, like me, dreamed how
A thousand years might dust lie on his brow
Yet thus would birds do between hedge and shaw.
AN ANTHOLOGY OF ENGLISH POETRY 307
EDWARD THOMAS
Time swims before me, making as a day
A thousand years, while the broad ploughland oak
Roars mill-like and men strike and bear the stroke
Of war as ever, audacious or resigned,
And God still sits aloft in the array
That we have wrought him, stone-deaf and stone-blind.
(1915) (1917)
The Owl
Downhill I came, hungry, and yet not starved;
Cold, yet had heat within me that was proof
Against the North wind; tired, yet so that rest
Had seemed the sweetest thing under a roof.
Then at the inn I had food, fire, and rest,
Knowing how hungry, cold, and tired was I.
All of the night was quite barred out except
An owl's cry, a most melancholy cry
Shaken out long and clear upon the hill,
No merry note, nor cause of merriment,
But one telling me plain what I escaped
And others could not, that night, as in I went.
And salted was my food, and my repose,
Salted and sobered, too, by the bird's voice
Speaking for all who lay under the stars,
Soldiers and poor, unable to rejoice
(1915) (1917)
308 DR. KOD6 KRISZITNA
EDWARD THOMAS
Rain
Rain, midnigjit rain, nothing but the wild rain
On this bleak hut, and solitude, and me
Remembering again that I shall die
And neither hear the rain nor give it thanks
For washing me cleaner than I have been
Since I was born into this solitude.
Blessed are the dead that the rain rains upon:
But here I pray that none whom once I loved
Is dying tonight or lying still awake
Solitary, listening to the rain,
Either in pain or thus in sympathy
Helpless among the living and the dead,
Like a cold water among broken reeds,
Myriads of broken reeds all still and stiff,
Like me who have no love which this wild rain
Has not dissolved except the love of death,
If love it be towards what is perfect and
Cannot, the tempest tells me, disappoint.
(1916) (1917)
AN ANTHOLOGY OF ENGLISH POETRY 309
D. H. LAWRENCE
(1885-1930)
David Herbert Lawrence was born in Eastwood, Nottinghamshire in
1885. His father was a miner and his mother a former schoolmistress. The
young Lawrence attended Beauvale Board School from 1891 until 1898,
becoming the first local pupil to win a County Council scholarship to
Nottingham High School in nearby Nottingham. He went on to become a
full-time student and received a teaching certificate from University
College Nottingham in 1908. During these early years he was working on
his first poems, some short stories, and a draft of a novel, Lsutitm, that was
eventually to become The White Peacock. At the end of 1907 he won a
short story competition in the Nottingham Guardian, which provided him
with a wider recognition for his literary talents. He worked as a
schoolmaster before turning to writing as a full profession. Apart from the
years in England during the First World War, he lived mostly abroad, in
Italy, Australia and New Mexico. Among his best-known novels are The
White Peacock (1911), Sons and Lovers (1913), The liainbinp (1915),
Womeninlove (1920), Aaron's Rod (1922), Kdngarvo (1923), ThePltoned
Servant (1926), and Lady Chatterley'sLover (1928). Beside his novels he
also wrote many short stories, essays and poems. Lawrence wrote almost
eight hundred poems, most of them relatively short. His first poems were
written in 1904 at the age of nineteen and two of his poems, Dreams Old
and Dreams Nascent, were among his earliest published works in The
English Review. Many of his later works, however, took the idea of free
verse to the extremes of lacking all rhyme and metre so that they are little
different from short ideas or memos, which could well have been written
in prose.
Piano
Softly, in the dusk, a woman is singing to me;
Taking me back down the vista of years, till I see
A child sitting under the piano, in the boom of the tingling strings
And pressing the small, poised feet of a mother who smiles as she sings.
310 DR. KOD6 KR1SZTINA
D. H. LAWRENCE
In spite of myself, the insidious mastery of song
Betrays me back, till the heart of me weeps to belong
to the old Sunday evenings at home, with the winter outside
And hymns in die cosy parlour, the tinkling piano our guide.
So now it is vain for the singer to burst into clamour
With the great black piano appassionato. The glamour
Of childish days is upon me, my manhood is cast
Down in the flood of remembrance, I weep like a child for the past.
119181
Baby Tortoise
You know what it is to be born alone,
Baby tortoise!
The first day to heave your feet little by little from the shell,
Not yet awake,
And remain lapsed on earth,
Not quite alive.
A tiny, fragile, half-animate bean.
To open your tiny beak-mouth, that looks as if it would never open,
Like some iron door;
To lift the upper hawk-beak from the lower base
And reach your skinny little neck
And take your first bite at some dim bit of herbage,
Alone, small insect,
Tiny bright-eye,
Slow one.
To take your first solitary bite
And move on your slow, solitary hunt.
Your bright, dark litde eye,
Your eye of a dark disturbed nighty
Under its slow lid, tiny baby tortoise,
So indomitable.
No one ever heard you complain.
AN ANTHOLOGY OF ENGLISH POETRY 311
D. H. LAWRENCE
You draw your head forward, slowly, from your little wimple
And set forward, slow-dragging, on your four-pinned toes, Rowing
slowly forward.
Whither away, small bird?
Rather like a baby working its limbs,
Except that you make slow, ageless progress
And a baby makes none.
The touch of sun excites you,
And the long ages, and the lingering chill
Make you pause to yawn,
Opening your impervious mouth,
Suddenly beak-shaped, and very wide, like some suddenly gaping
pincers;
Soft red tongue, and hard thin gums,
Then close the wedge of your little mountain front,
Your face, baby tortoise.
Do you wonder at the world, as slowly you turn your head in its
wimple
And look with laconic, black eyes?
Or is sleep coming over you again,
The non-life?
You are so hard to wake.
Are you able to wonder?
Or is it just your indomitable will and pride of the first life
Looking round
And slowly pitching itself against the inertia
Which had seemed invincible?
The vast inanimate,
And the fine brilliance of your so tiny eye,
Challenger.
312 DR. KOD6 KRISZTTNA
D. H. LAWRENCE
Nay, tiny shell-bird,
What a huge vast inanimate it is, that you must row against,
What an incalculable inertia.
Challenger,
Little Ulysses, fore-runner,
No bigger than my thumb-nail,
Buon viaggio.
All animate creation on your shoulder,
Set forth, little Titan, under your battle-shield.
The ponderous, preponderate,
Inanimate universe;
And you are slowly moving, pioneer, you alone.
How vivid your travelling seems now, in the troubled sunshine,
Stoic, Ulyssean atom;
Suddenly hasty, reckless, on high toes.
Voiceless little bird,
Resting your head half out of your wimple
In the slow dignity of your eternal pause.
Alone, with no sense of being alone,
And hence six times more solitary;
Fulfilled of the slow passion of pitching through immemorial ages
Your little round house in the midst of chaos.
Over the garden earth,
Small bird,
Over the edge of all things.
Traveller,
With your tail tucked a little on one side
Like a gentleman in a long-skirted coat.
All life carried on your shoulder,
Invincible fore-runner.
11921)
AN ANTHOLOGY OF ENGLISH POETRY 313
D. H. LAWRENCE
How Beastly the Bourgeois Is
How beastly the bourgeois is
especially the male of the species -
Presentable, eminently presentable -
shall I make you a present of him?
Isn't he handsome? Isn't he healthy? Isn't he a fine specimen?
Doesn't he look the fresh clean Englishman, outside?
Isn't it God's own image? tramping his thirty miles a day
after partridges, or a little rubber ball?
wouldn't you like to be like that, well off, and quite the
thing
Oh, but wait!
Let him meet a new emotion, let him be faced with another
man's need,
let him come home to a bit of moral difficulty, let life
face him with a new demand on his understanding
and then watch him go soggy, like a wet meringue.
Watch him turn into a mess, either a fool or a bully.
Just watch the display of him, confronted with a new
demand on his intelligence,
a new life-demand.
How beastly the bourgeois is
especially the male of the species -
Nicely groomed, like a mushroom
standing there so sleek and erect and eyeable -
and like a fungus, living on the remains of a bygone life
sucking his life out of the dead leaves of greater life
than his own.
And even so, he's stale, he's been there too long.
Touch him, and you'll find he's all gone inside
just like an old mushroom, all wormy inside, and hollow
under a smooth skin and an upright appearance.
314 DR. KOD6 KRISZITNA
D. H. LAWRENCE
Full of seething, wormy, hollow feelings
rather nasty—
How beastly the bourgeois is!
Standing in their thousands, these appearances, in damp
England
what a pity they can't all be kicked over
like sickening toadstools, and left to melt back, swiftly
into the soil of England.
(19291
AN ANTHOLOGY OF ENGLISH POETRY 315
RUPERTBROOKE
(1887-1915)
Rupert Brooke was born in Rugby, Warwickshire. He was educated
there and at King's College, Cambridge, which he left with a degree in
1909. His first book of verse, Poems, was published in 1911. During
1913-14 he travelled extensively in Europe, the United States, Canada,
and the South Seas writing poems and essays. When the war broke out he
took part in the unsuccessful defence of Antwerp. He started writing his
"war sonnets" in December 1914 that would make him famous. His five
famous war sonnets appeared inNew Numbers in early 1915. They sold in
such great quantity that the journal exhausted its war supply of paper and
closed down. Five months later, he died of dysentery and blood poisoning
at sea near Scyros on April 23,1915, and was buried there. His book, 1914
and Other Poems, was published posthumously in 1915. His Collected
Poems (1918), including the 1914 group of sonnets (published in 1915),
caught the mood of romantic patriotism of the early war years. His Letters
from America appeared in 1916 with an introduction by Henry James.
Peace
Now, God be thanked Who has matched us with His hour
And caught our youth, and wakened us from sleeping,
With hand made sure, dear eye, and sharpened power,
To turn, as swimmers into cleanness leaping,
Glad from a world grown old and cold and weary,
Leave the sick hearts that honour could not move,
And half-men, and their dirty songs and dreary,
And all the little emptiness of love!
Oh! we, who have known shame, we have found release there,
Where there's no ill, no grief, but sleep has mending,
Naught broken save this body, lost but breath;
Nothing to shake the laughing heart's long peace there
But only agony, and that has ending;
And the worst friend and enemy is but Death.
11915)
316 DR. KOD6 KRISZITNA
RUPERT BROOKE
The Soldier
I should die, think only this of me:
That there's some corner of a foreign field
That is for ever England. There shall be
In that rich earth a richer dust concealed;
A dust whom England bore, shaped, made aware,
Gave, once, her flowers to love, her ways to roam;
A body of England's, breathing English air,
Washed by the rivers, blest by suns of home.
And think, this heart, all evil shed away,
A pulse in the eternal mind, no less
Gives somewhere back the thoughts by England given;
Her sights and sounds; dreams happy as her day;
And laughter, learnt of friends; and gentleness,
In hearts at peace, under an English heaven.
(1915)
Heaven
Fish (fly-replete, in depth of June,
Dawdling away their wat'ry noon)
Ponder deep wisdom, dark or clear,
Each secret fishy hope or fear.
Fish say, they have their Stream and Pond;
But is mere anything Beyond?
This life cannot be All, they swear,
For how unpleasant, if it were!
One may not doubt that, somehow, Good
Shall come of Water and of Mud;
And, sure, the reverent eye must see
A Purpose in Liquidity.
We darkly know, by Faith we cry,
The future is not Wholly Dry.
Mud unto mud! - Death eddies near -
Not here the appointed End, not here!
But somewhere, beyond Space and Time.
AN ANTHOLOGY OF ENGLISH POETRY 317
RUPERT BROOKE
Is wetter water, slimier slime!
And there (they trust) there swimmeth One
Who swam ere rivers were begun,
Immense, of fishy form and mind,
Squamous, omnipotent, and kind;
And under that Almighty Fin,
The littlest fish may enter in.
Oh! never fly conceals a hook,
Fish say, in the Eternal Brook,
But more than mundane weeds are there,
And mud, celestially fair;
Fat caterpillars drift around,
And Paradisal grubs are found;
Unfading moths, immortal flies,
And the worm that never dies.
And in that Heaven of all their wish,
There shall be no more land, say fish.
(1915)
318 DR. KOD6 KRISZITNA
ISAAC ROSENBERQ
(1890-1918)
Rosenberg was born in Bristol of an Anglo-Jewish family that moved to
the East End of London in 1897. Due to his family's poor financial
circumstances he left school when he was fourteen, and became apprenticed
as an engraver in a company of art publishers. In 1911 Rosenberg was
provided with the opportunity to study at the Slade School of Art. By this
time his interest in poetry had gradually increased and through the
encouragement of his family he began circulating his poems. Despite his
training, neither painting nor writing earned him any great monetary
reward. In 1912 he published a pamphlet of poetry at his own expense,
Night and Day. Rosenberg went to South Africa for health reasons in 1914.
He was unable to make a career as a portrait artist as he had hoped. Due to
financial reasons, Rosenberg returned to England in 1915 and joined the
Bantam Battallion of the 12th Suffolk Regiment. Before Rosenberg entered
the war, he published a volume of poems entitled Youth (1915), which was
admired by bodi Ezra Pound and T.S. Eliot. He was killed at dawn on April
1,1918, while on patrol. His work was experimental in character, probably
influenced by his Jewish background. His best-known poems deal with his
experiences and fierce apprehension of physical reality in the trenches. His
collected works were published in 1937.
Break of Day in the Trenches
The darkness crumbles away
It is the same old druid Time as ever,
Only a live thing leaps my hand,
A queer sardonic rat,
As I pull the parapet's poppy
To stick behind my ear.
Droll rat, they would shoot you if they knew
Your cosmopolitan sympathies,
Now you have touched this English hand
You will do the same to a German
Soon, no doubt, if it be your pleasure
To cross the sleeping green between.
AN ANTHOLOGY OF ENGLISH POETRY 319
ISAAC ROSENBERG
It seems you inwardly grin as you pass
Strong eyes, fine limbs, haughty athletes,
Less chanced than you for life,
Bonds to the whims of murder,
Sprawled in the bowels of the earth,
The torn fields of France.
What do you see in our eyes
At the shrieking iron and flame
Hurled through still heavens?
What quaver - what heart aghast?
Poppies whose roots are in men's veins
Drop, and are ever dropping;
But mine in my ear is safe,
Just a little white with the dust.
(1916) (1922)
Dead Mali's Dump
The plunging limbers over the shattered track
Racketed with their rusty freight,
Stuck out like many crowns of thorns,
And the rusty stakes like sceptres old
To stay the flood of brutish men
Upon our brothers dear.
The wheels lurched over sprawled dead
But pained them not, though their bones crunched,
Their shut mouths made no moan,
They lie there huddled, friend and foeman,
Man born of man, and born of woman,
And shells go crying over them
From night till night and now.
Earth has waited for them
All the time of their growth
Fretting for their decay:
Now she has them at last!
In the strength of their strength
Suspended - stopped and held.
320 DR. KOD6 KRISZTTNA
ISAAC ROSENBERG
What fierce imaginings their dark souls lit
Earth! have they gone into you?
Somewhere they must have gone,
And flung on your hard back
Is their souls3
 sack,
Emptied of God-ancestralled essences.
Who hurled them out? Who hurled?
None saw their spirits* shadow shake the grass,
Or stood aside for the half used life to pass
Out of those doomed nostrils and the doomed mouth,
When the swift iron burning bee
Drained the wild honey of their youth.
What of us, who flung on the shrieking pyre,
Walk, our usual thoughts untouched,
Our lucky limbs as on ichor fed,
Immortal seeming ever?
Perhaps when the flames beat loud on us,
A fear may choke in our veins
And the startled blood may stop.
The air is loud with death,
The dark air spurts with fire
The explosions ceaseless are.
Tunelessly now, some minutes past,
These dead strode time with vigorous life,
Till the shrapnel called 'an end!'
But not to all. In bleeding pangs
Some borne on stretchers dreamed of home,
Dear things, war-blotted from their hearts.
A man's brains splattered on
A stretcher-bearer's face;
His shook shoulders slipped their load,
But when they bent to look again
The drowning soul was sunk too deep
For human tenderness.
AN ANTHOLOGY OF ENGLISH POETRY 321
ISAAC ROSENBERG
They left this dead with the older dead,
Stretched at the cross roads.
Burnt black by strange decay,
Their sinister faces lie
The lid over each eye,
The grass and coloured clay
More motion have than they,
Joined to the great sunk silences.
Here is one not long dead;
His dark hearing caught our far wheels,
And the choked soul stretched weak hands
To reach the living word the far wheels said,
The blood-dazed intelligence beating for light,
Crying through the suspense of the far torturing wheels
Swift for die end to break,
Or the wheels to break,
Cried as the tide of the world broke over his sight.
Will they come? Will they ever come?
Even as the mixed hoofs of the mules,
The quivering-bellied mules,
And the rushing wheels all mixed
With his tortured upturned sight,
So we crashed round the bend,
We heard his weak scream,
We heard his very last sound,
And our wheels grazed his dead face.
(1917) (1922)
322 DR. KOD6 KRISZTTNA
ISAAC ROSENBERG
Louse Hunting
Nudes - stark and glistening,
Yelling in lurid glee. Grinning faces
And raging limbs
Whirl over the floor one fire.
For a shirt verminously busy
Yon soldier tore from his throat, with oaths
Godhead might shrink at, but not the lice.
And soon the shirt was aflare
Over the candle he'd lit while we lay.
Then we all sprang up and stript
To hunt the verminous brood.
Soon like a demons' pantomine
The place was raging.
See the silhouettes agape,
See the glibbering shadows
Mixed with the battled arms on the wall.
See gargantuan hooked fingers
Pluck in supreme flesh
To smutch supreme littleness.
See the merry limbs in hot Highland fling
Because some wizard vermin
Charmed from the quiet this revel
When our ears were half lulled
By the dark music
Blown from Sleep's trumpet.
(1917 (1922)
AN ANTHOLOGY OF ENGLISH POETRY 323
WILFRED OWEN
(1893-1918)
Owen was born in Oswestry, Shropshire in 1893. He was the eldest of
four children and brought up in the Anglican religion of the evangelical
school. After leaving school he worked as lay assisstant to a country vicar.
He moved to Bordeaux (France) in 1913, as a teacher of English in the
Berlitz School of Languages, and one year later he was a private teacher in
a prosperous family in the Pyrenees. He enlisted in the Artists' Rifles in
October 1915, which was followed by 14 months of training in England.
He was drafted to France in 1917, the worst war winter. His total war
experience was rather short: four months, from which only five weeks in
the line. He was invalided out of the Front Line with shell shock. On this is
based all his war poetry, which exposed the horrors of life in the trenches.
Many of his descriptions of the frightening world of the trenches looks
back to Virgil's Underworld and Dante's Inferno, with a distinctly
personal combination of beauty and terror recalling Percy Bysshe Shelley's
poetry. After battle experience, thoroughly shocked by the horrors of war,
he went to Craiglockhart War Hospital near Edinburgh. It is here that he
began writing poetry and he soon fashioned his own style and approach to
the war. His most mature works were all created in the very short space
between August 1917 and September 1918. In August 1918, Owen
returned to France. He was killed one week before the war ended.
Characteristic of his poetry is the use of pararhyme, alliteration and
assonance. In this he may be considered a precursor of the generation of
W. H. Auden and Stephen Spender.
324 DR. KOD6 KRISZITNA
WILFRED OWEN
Anthem for Doomed Youth
What passing-bells for these who die as cattle?
- Only die monstruous anger of the guns.
Only the stuttering rifles' rapid rattle
Can patter out their hasty orisons.
No mockeries now for them; no prayers nor bells;
Nor any voice of mourning save the choirs, -
The shrill, demented choirs of wailing shells;
And bugles calling for them from sad shires.
What candles may be held to speed them all?
Not in the hands of boys, but in their eyes
Shall shine the holy glimmers of good-byes.
The pallor of girls' brows shall be their pall;
Their flowers the tenderness of patient minds,
And each slow dusk a drawing-down of blinds.
(19171 119201
On Seeing a Piece of Our Artillery Brought into Action
Be slowly lifted up, thou long black arm,
Great gun towering towards Heaven, about to curse;
Sway steep against them, and for years rehearse
Huge imprecations like a blasting charm!
Reach at that Arrogance which needs thy harm,
And beat it down before its sins grow worse;
Spend our resentment, cannon, - yea, disburse
Our gold in shapes of flame, our breaths in storm.
Yet, for men's sakes whom thy vast malison
Must wither innocent of enmity,
Be not withdrawn, dark arm, thy spoilure done,
Safe to the bosom of our prosperity.
But when thy spell be cast complete and whole,
May God curse thee, and cut thee from our soul!
119171 (19201
AN ANTHOLOGY OF ENGLISH POETRY 325
WILFRED OWEN
The End
After the blast of lightning from the east,
The flourish of loud clouds, the Chariot Throne;
After the drums of time have rolled and ceased,
And by the bronze west long retreat is blown,
Shall Life renew these bodies? Of a truth
All death will he annul, all tears assuage?-
Or fill these void veins roll again with youth,
And wash, with an immortal water, Age?
When I do ask white Age he saith not so:
'My head hangs weighed with snow/
And when I hearken to the Earth, she saith:
*My fiery heart shrinks, aching. It is death.
Mine ancient scars shall not be glorified,
Nor my titanic tears, the seas, be dried.'
(1917) (1920)
Dulce Et Decorum Est
Bent double, like old beggars under sacks,
Knock-kneed, coughing like hags, we cursed through sludge,
Till on the haunting flares we turned our backs
And towards our distant rest began to trudge.
Men marched asleep. Many had lost their boots
But limped on, blood-shod. All went lame; all blind;
Drunk with fatigue; deaf even to the hoots
Of tired, outstripped Five-Nines that dropped behind.
Gas! GAS! Quick, boys! - An ecstasy of fumbling,
Fitting the clumsy helmets just in time;
But someone still was yelling out and stumbling,
49 A famous Latin tag from Horace, Odes 3.2.13, according to which It is sweet and meet to die fir
one's country. Sweet! And decorous!
326 DR. KOD6 KRISZTINA
WILFRED OWEN
And floundering like a man in fire or lime...
Dim, through the misty panes and thick green ligjit,
As under a green sea, I saw him drowning.
In all my dreams, before my helpless sight,
He plunges at me, guttering, choking, drowning.
If in some smothering dreams you too could pace
Behind the wagon that we flung him in,
And watch the white eyes writhing in his face,
His hanging face, like a devil's sick of sin;
If you could hear, at every jolt, the blood
Come gargling from the froth-corrupted lungs,
Obscene as cancer, bitter as the cud
Of vile, incurable sores on innocent tongues, -
My friend, you would not tell with such high zest
To children ardent for some desperate glory,
The old Lie: Duke et decorum est
Pro patria mori.
(Oct. 1917-Mar. 1918) (1920)
AN ANTHOLOGY OF ENGLISH POETRY 327
SOURCES
• Talpgrave,FrancisT. (ed.) (1902)TheGoldenTreasury.MacmiUanandCo.
Limited, London.
• Venable, W. H. (ed.) (1898) Selections from the Poems of Lord Byron.
American Book Company, New York.
• Williams, W.E. (ed.) (1960) ThomasHardy. Penguin Books, Great Britain.
• Gardner, Helen, (ed.) (1957) The Metaphysical Poets. Penguin Books,
Great Britain.
• Quiller-Couch, A. T. (ed.) (1908) The Oxford Book of English Verse,
1250-1900. Clarendon Press, London.
• Kilham Roberts, Denys. (ed.) (1953) The Centuries' Poetry, An Anthology,
Volume I, Chaucer to Shakespeare. Penguin Books, London.
• Kilham Roberts, Denys. (ed.) (1942) The Centuries' Poetry, An Anthology,
Volume 3, Pope to Keats. Penguin Books, London.
" Kilham Roberts, Denys. (ed.) (1950) The Centuries' Poetry, An Anthology,
Volume 4, Hood to Morris. Penguin Books, London.
• AUott, Kenneth (ed.) (1962) The Penguin Book of Contemporary Verse
1918-60. Penguin Books, England.
• Wavell, A. P. (cd.) (1960) Other Men's Flowers, An Anthology of Poetry.
Penguin Books, Great Britain.
• Eagle, Dorothy (ed.). (1970) The Concise Oxford Dictionary of English
Literature. OUP
• Hillycrs, Dorothy. (1968) A Short History of English Literature. Beacon
Verlag, Bad Durkheim.
• Cuddon, J. A. (1991) Dictionary of Literary Terms and Literary Theory.
Penguin Books, London.
• Abrams, M. H. (1981) A Glossary of Literary Terms. Holt-Saunders
International Editions.
• Abrams, M. H. (gen. cd.) (2000) The Norton Anthology of English
Literature. Volume I-II. W. W. Norton and Company, New York.
• Coombes, H. (1977) English Literature Made Simple. Heinemann,
London.
• Ford, Boris, (ed.) (1982) The New Pelican Guide to English literature.
Volumes 2-6: 2. The Age of Shakespeare. 4. From Dryden to Johnson. 5.
From Blake to Byron. 6. From Dickens to Hardy. Penguin Books, England
328 DR. KOD6 KRISZTINA
SOURCES
Richards, Bernard. (1988) English Poetry of the Victorian Period.
1830-1890. Longman Group, UK.
Bamet, Sylvan, (gen. ed.) (1988) Shakespeare, The Sonnets. Penguin
Group, England.
Findlay, Isobel M. (2001) Introduction to Literature. Harcourt Canada
Ltd., Toronto.
AN ANTHOLOGY OF ENGLISH POETRY 329